Chapter: a-letter-to-god
Q: How much money did Lencho receive from God?
A: He received only seventy pesos from God.
Q: What was the effect of the hail storm on tile valley?
A: No crop or vegetation was left in the entire valley.
Q: What did Lencho’s field need badly?
A: His fields needed heavy rain badly.
Q: Lencho had only one hope. What was it?
A: Lencho’s only hope was help from God.
Q: What destroyed the crop?
A: The hailstorm which lasted for an hour destroyed the crops.
Q: Why did Lencho keep gazing at the sky?
A: Lencho kept gazing at the sky because he hopefully wished for rain.
Q: How did Lencho feel when he counted the money in the envelope?
A: He got angry after counting the money in the envelope.
Q: Where was the Lencho’s hous located?
A: ‘The House’ was located on the top(crest) of a low hill.
Q: How did Lencho feel when it started raining?
A: Lencho felt very happy.
Q: Who was Lencho?
A: Lencho was a hard-working farmer.
Q: What does Lencho call the rain-drops?
A: He calls the big rain-drops ten cent pesos and the small rain-drops five-cent pesos.
Q: What could be seen from Lencho’s house?
A: The fields of the ripe com could be seen from his house.
Q: Who did Lencho write a letter to?
A: Lencho wrote a letter to God.
Q: Who sent the money to Lencho?
A: The postmaster sent the money to Lencho.
Q: When did it start raining?
A: It started raining when the family was having dinner.
Q: Who does Lencho blame for the loss of thirty pesos in the envelope?
A: He blames the post-office employees for this loss.
Q: How did Lencho appeal to God?
A: Lencho wrote a letter to God, asking for one hundred pesos.
Q: Why do you think it is called ‘the’ house and not ‘a house’?
A: It is called ‘the house’ and not ‘a house’ because it was the only house in the entire valley.
Q: Was the rain really a blessing?
A: No, the rain proved to be a curse.
Q: What was the effect of the rain on the crops?
A: Lencho’s crops were destroyed because of the rain and the storm.
Q: What had Lencho been doing throughout the morning?
A: He had been looking at the clouds in the northeast throughout the morning.
Q: How did the postmaster react on reading Lencho’s letter?
A: He felt that such faith in God should be sustained.
Q: How did Lencho’s field look after the hail had rained?
A: The field looked as if covered with salt.
Q: What did Lencho hope for?
A: Lencho hoped for getting some rain from the sky.
Q: How did postmaster react seeing Lencho’s letter?
A: The postmaster laughed heartily on seeing Lencho’s letter.
Q: How much money did Lencho demand from God?
A: Lencho demanded one hundred pesos from God.
Q: Why did the postmaster decide to answer Lencho’s letter to God?
A: By doing so he wanted to protect Lencho’s faith in God.
Q: How did Lencho regard his field? Why?
A: When it started raining Lencho regarded his field with satisfaction. He was happy to see his crop draped in a curtain of rain. He hoped to reap a good harvest.
Q: What does Lencho call the post-office employees?
A: He calls them “a bunch of crooks.”
Q: What was the reaction of Lencho after receiving lesser amount of money?
A: Lencho thought that the post office employees had taken, away 30 pesos.   Short Answer Type Questions
Q: Are there people like Lencho in the real world? What kind of a person would you say he is? You may select appropriate words from the following list to answer the question. Greedy, naïve, stupid, ungrateful, selfish, comical, unquestioning
A: In the real world it is almost impossible to find people, like Lencho. Lencho seems to be naïve and unquestioning. Naïve in the sense that he doesn’t even bother to think about who sent the money or if God would actually send the money. Probably his naiveté comes from his unquestioning belief in the God.
Q: Why did Lencho not want the money to be sent through mail?
A: Lencho wrote in his second letter that he received only seventy pesos but he needed a hundred pesos. He requested god not to send rest of the money by post since the post office employees were a bunch of crooks and would steal the money.
Q: What did Lencho write in his second letter to god?
A: Lencho was angry. He decided to write another letter to god. He wrote about the money in his second letter to god. He wrote that he had asked for a hundred pesos. But he received only seventy pesos. He asked god to send the balance amount but not through the mail. It was because the post office employees were a bunch of crooks.
Q: Who does Lencho think has taken the rest of the money? What is the irony in the situation?
A: Lencho had all his doubts on people working in the post office. The irony of the situation is the finger pointing on those who had tried to help out Lencho. In real life also we come across such situations. Many a time you would have tried helping someone and he may get a wrong message.
Q: Why does the postmaster send money to Lencho? Why does he sign the letter ‘God’?
A: Postmaster was moved by Lencho’s complete faith in the God. So, he decided to send money to Lencho. Moreover, the postmaster did not want to shake Lencho’s faith in God. So, he signed the letter ‘God’. It was a good ploy to convey a message that God had himself written the letter.
Q: What did Lencho and the earth need immediately?
A: The only thing the earth needed was rain. Lencho, being a farmer wished for heavy rain. At least, a shower was necessary. His fields needed water immediately otherwise the crop would be completely mined. So, he would constantly look at the sky towards the north-east.
Q: What did the postmaster do then?
A: The postmaster burst into laughter on seeing the deep faith of Lencho in God. He collected money from his employees. He even gave part of his salary. He put all the money in an envelope addressed to Lencho and wrote a letter containing a single word “God”.
Q: Why was Lencho angry when he received the letter?
A: Lencho had asked God to send him a hundred pesos. But when he opened the envelope he found only seventy pesos in it. He thought that the post-office employees had taken the rest of the money. So he became angry when he received the letter.
Q: “Now we’re really going to get some water woman.” Is Lencho sure that it is going to rain? Give a reason for your answer.
A: Yes. Lencho is sure that it is going to rain. He needs rain for his crops. He has been gazing at the sky since morning. He has perhaps seen some signs of coming rain. True to his prediction. It soon starts raining.
Q: Why was Lencho angry? What did he do?
A: Lencho had deep faith in God and hence wrote a letter to God asking for 100 pesos. But when he received 70 pesos instead of 100, he was angry. He wrote another letter to God asking him to send the rest of the money, but not through the post-office as they were a ‘bunch of crooks’.
Q: How far would you agree that one’s positivity can bring in a spark of brightness even in adverse circumstances’?
A: It is absolutely true that optimism can bring about a spark of brightness even in adverse situations. It was Lencho’s innocent optimism that eventually led to his getting seventy pesos. In fact, it was his positivity despite the hailstorm that he even wrote a letter to God in the first place. His hope finally triumphed.
Q: What were trenches feelings when he found the letter with money in it? What did he do after opening the letter?
A: Lencho was not at all surprised to see the money in the letter as he was fully confident about it. He knew that God would send money to him. On opening the letter he found seventy pesos instead of a hundred. So, he wrote another letter to God to send and rest of the amount but now not through the mail as the post office employees were crooks.
Q: Why did Lencho think of writing a letter to God? What did he write in the letter?
A: The hailstones completely destroyed Lencho’s cornfields. They would have no corn that year. Having lost all hopes, Lencho thought of writing a letter to God. He requested God to send him a hundred pesos to sow his fields again. He wrote that he needed money to live until the new crops came. If God didn’t help, his family would face starvation.
Q: Why did the postmaster decide to answer Lencho’s letter?
A: After laughing at the very idea of a letter to God, the postmaster became serious soon. He was impressed with the unshaken faith of the sender in God. He wished he had the faith of the man who wrote that letter to God. So, in order not to shake the writer’s faith in God, the postmaster decided to answer the letter.
Q: Why did Lencho show no surprise on seeing the money?
A: Lencho had a firm faith in God. He did expect help from him. He didn’t show any surprise when he received the sum of seventy pesos. He believed in the mercy of God and expected definite help from him. So, he showed no surprise when he received the money.
Q: Whom did Lencho write a letter? What did he ask for?
A: When Lencho’s annual crop was completely destroyed due to heavy rains and hailstorms and there was no one to help hint during the crisis. At that time Lencho wrote a letter to God.He wrote the letter requesting him to send 100 pesos so that he could sow his fields again till the next crop.
Q: Was Lencho surprised to find a letter with money in it? Why/Why not?
A: Lencho was not at all surprised to receive an envelope with money in it because he had utter faith in God. His unshakeable faith gave him firm confidence.
Q: Lencho calls the raindrops ‘new coins’. Why does he call them so?
A: Lencho hoped to get good crops because of raindrops. He thought he would earn good money so he called them new coins. But raindrops soon turned into hailstones which destroyed all his crops and ruined his hopes.
Q: What are the raindrops compared to and why?
A: It starts raining. Lencho is very happy. He compares the big drops of rain to ten-cent pieces and the little ones to five-cent pieces. Lencho needs rain for a good harvest. If he has good crops, he will get money. That is why he compares the raindrops to coins.
Q: How was Lencho sure that it was going to rain?
A: Lencho knew his fields intimately and he could predict the weather by looking at the sky. His experienced eyes saw clouds and he predicted rain.
Q: Lencho describes the post office employees as “a bunch of crooks.”(i) Were they a bunch of crooks?(ii) How would you describe them?
A: Lencho thought that the post office employees had cheated him. So he calls them “a bunch of crooks.” But they were not crooks. They were kind people. They wanted to help Lencho. So they collected seventy pesos and sent the money to Lencho by mail.
Q: Why does the postmaster send money to Lencho? Why does he sign the letter “God”?
A: The postmaster was a very generous fellow. In order not to shake Lencho’s faith in God, he collected money and sent it to Lencho. The postmaster signed the letter “God”, lest Lencho should think that the money had not been sent by God.
Q: How did the rain come as predicted by Lencho and how did he receive it?
A: Lencho’s wife was preparing supper(dinner). The older boys were working in the field. It was during the meal, in the north-east huge mountains of clouds could be seen approaching. Then, as Lencho had predicted, big drops of rain began to fall. Lencho went out to have the pleasure of feeling the rain on his body. To him, the raindrops were like the new coins.
Q: What promised a good harvest?
A: Lencho felt that the field of ripe corn dotted with flowers always promised a good harvest. That is why he was anticipating a good harvest.
Q: Describe the loss caused by the heavy fall of hailstones in general and to Lencho in particular.
A: For an hour, the hailstones rained on the house, the garden, the hillside, and the cornfield. Actually, the whole valley was covered with them. Leaves and flowers were destroyed. Lencho’s fields were covered with a white layer. The corn was totally destroyed. The hail had left practically nothing. There was no chance of any corn that year for Lencho.
Q: How did Lencho’s prediction about rain come true?
A: Lencho had looked towards the north-east and remarked that they would get some water. His prediction came true when it started raining in the evening.
Q: What was the address written and how was the letter sent to God?
A: Lencho had an unshaken faith in God and his mercy. Therefore, he decided to write a letter to God for help. He wrote ‘To God’ on the envelope and put the letter inside. He went to the post office and placed a stamp on the letter. Finally, he dropped it into the mailbox.
Q: How did the postmaster answer Lencho’s letter by sending him the money?
A: The postmaster didn’t want to shake the writer’s faith in God and so decided to help him. It needed something more than goodwill. So he collected money from his employees and himself contributed a part of the salary. He could collect only seventy pesos. He put the money into the envelope and put a single word `God’ as the signature and posted it to Lencho.
Q: Why was Lencho angry after he counted the money?
A: Lencho had demanded a sum of a hundred pesos as an immediate help from God. He did hope in God’s mercy and help. However, his happiness was short-lived when he counted the money. The sum was short by 30 pesos. Lencho believed that God did send him a hundred pesos but the dishonest post office employees embezzled money.
Q: Lencho has great faith in God. Does he have the same kind of faith in man? Taking examples from the story describes his attitude towards God and man.
A: Lencho’s crop was totally destroyed. He had great faith in God. He wrote a letter to God asking for a hundred pesos as help. The postmaster and the employees collected seventy pesos and sent the money to him. Lencho thought that the employees had stolen 30 pesos. He wrote another letter to God asking for 30 pesos more but not through the post office. He called the employees ‘a bunch of crooks’. This highlights Lencho’s attitude to God and man. He had full faith in God but didn’t have any faith in man.
Q: What impression do you form of the postmaster after reading the story ‘A Letter to God’?
A: The postmaster was a kind, generous, helpful, amiable and God-fearing man. He was generous, as he helped Lencho with 70 pesos. He also wrote a reply to Lencho’s letter in order to maintain his faith in God.
Q: Why were Lencho and his family in distress? Whom did he ask for help?
A: Lencho’s crops were completely destroyed by the hailstones. He feared that he and his family would go hungry. He had no one to help but he had full faith in God whose eyes see everything. He wrote a letter to God asking for a hundred pesos to sow the crop and live until the next harvest.
Q: Did the letter reach God? Why did the postmaster send a reply to Lencho?
A: No, the letter did not reach God. The postman saw the letter addressed to God. He took the letter to the postmaster. The postmaster did not want to shake Lencho’s faith in God. So he sent a reply to Lencho. He sent seventy pesos to him.
Q: Where was Lencho’s house situated?
A: Lencho was a farmer. His house was the only one in the valley. It was situated on the top of a low hill overlooking the valley. From this height, he could see the river. He could also see his fields of ripe corn dotted with flowers. The flowers always promised a good harvest.
Q: Why were the raindrops like new coins for Lencho?
A: Lencho had been impatiently waiting for the rain. The earth needed a downpour(rain/shower) immediately. At least, a shower was necessary to save the crops. Fortunately for Lencho, in the north-east huge mountains of clouds could be seen approaching. Big drops of rain began to fall. Every drop was precious for the fields and the crops. The bigger drops were worth ten-cent pieces and the little ones were fives.
Q: In the hearts of all who lived in that solitary house …, there was a single hope ….’ What was that?
A: The hail had practically left nothing. The cornfields were totally destroyed. Lencho and his family would have no corn that year. He could expect no help from human beings. In the hearts of all who lived in that solitary house, there was a single hope: help from God. Only God could save them from such a miserable situation.
Q: How did the postmaster react when a postman showed him the letter to God?
A: When a postman received Lencho’s letter, he laughed heartily and took that letter to the postmaster. The postmaster looked at the letter to God and laughed heartily too. However, he soon grew serious. He was impressed with the sender’s faith in God who tried to correspond him. “What a faith”! he could utter only such words.
Q: Why did Lencho go a bit earlier than usual to the post office the following Sunday?
A: Lencho had firm faith in God and His mercy. He did expect a reply from Him. So, on the following Sunday, he went to the post office a bit earlier than usual. The postman handed over the letter to Lencho. The postmaster was only content to perform a good deed.
Q: Why did Lencho ask help from God? Did he receive it?
A: Lencho had written a letter to God requesting him to send a sum of one hundred pesos. This money was necessary to show his fields again and to live until the new crop came. The help did come in the form of 70 pesos. Actually, it was not God but the kind-hearted postmaster who had collected the money and sent it to Lencho by post-signing God.’
Q: What is ironic about the ending of the story?
A: The end of the story is rather ironic. The postmaster was greatly impressed by Lencho’s faith in God. He didn’t want to shake his faith in God. He collected a sum of seventy pesos from his employees and contributed a part of his salary. However, his great act of charity was not recognised and appreciated by the man who received help. On the contrary, the helpers were ironically called ‘a bunch of crooks’.   Long Answer Type Questions
Q: There are two kinds of conflict in the story: between humans and nature, and between humans themselves. How are these conflicts illustrated?
A: In the initial part of the story the episode of rainfall turning into a hailstorm shows the conflict between man and nature. When it is a rainfall the man is very happy dreaming about happy days ahead. But once the rain turns into hail the man is ruing the happening of hailstorm. The way Lencho is feeling sad and gloomy after the storm appropriately projects the conflict of the nature and the man. In the later part of the story when Lencho blames post office people for stealing part of the money then it is showing the conflict between humans. Although nothing is written what happened after that, but anybody can imagine the mental situation when postmaster read the letter.
Q: Give a character-sketch of Lencho.
A: Lencho was a simple man and a hardworking farmer. He worked as an ox in his field.Lencho’s entire crops were badly destroyed by the hailstorm. So, he became very sad as he was worried about his family. He was an optimistic person. Although his only source of living was taken away, he didn’t lose hope. He had his last hope in God. He was confident that God would help him in his distress. Lencho was an innocent atheist who didn’t know that there was no such living person as God who could send him money. He had blind faith in God and sought solution of his problem Troms God only.
Q: How did the postmaster and post office employees help Lencho? How did he react to their help?
A: Answer As Lencho had predicted the rain did come. At mealtime, it came in the form of big drops. Naturally, the rain gladdened his heart. He could see better prospects of a good crop. However, his happiness was short-lived. Suddenly, a strong wind began to blow. The rain turned into big hailstones. The falling of heavy ball of big hailstones for an hour completely destroyed everything— leaves, trees, and the standing crops. Naturally, such a heavy loss put Lencho into a deep concern.  Answer Lencho was a hard working farmer living with his family in a lonely house on the top of the low hill. That year his crop was very good and needed a shower. It rained but the rain brought hailstones and destroyed the whole crop. Not even a single leaf was left on the plants. He had no hope of help except help from God. He had firm faith in God and he decided to write a letter to God requesting to send hundred pesos to sow seeds again and to live until the crop grew up. The letter reached to the postmaster. The postmaster was also a man of faith, who did not want to shake the faith of Lencho. He collected seventy pesos from his employees and sent it to Lencho. On opening the envelop Lencho got angry as he received only seventy pesos instead of hundred pesos. Once again he wrote a letter to God to send him the remaining money with a request not to send through the post office employees as they were a bunch of crooks. Answer In the initial part of the story the episode of rainfall turning into a hailstorm shows the conflict between man and nature. When it is a rainfall the man is very happy dreaming about happy days ahead. But once the rain turns into hail the man is ruing the happening of hailstorm. The way Lencho is feeling sad and gloomy after the storm appropriately projects the conflict of the nature and the man. In the later part of the story when Lencho blames post office people for stealing part of the money then it is showing the conflict between humans. Although nothing is written what happened after that, but anybody can imagine the mental situation when postmaster read the letter.
Q: Who does Lencho think has taken the rest of the money? Describe the ironic ending of the story.
A: Lencho’s faith in God was complete and unshaken. When he lost all hopes, he looked towards God for help. And he was sure that God would come to the help of a simple man of clear conscience like him. So, when he saw the money, he was not at all surprised as he had been waiting for it. But when he counted the money, he became angry. He was sure that someone had stolen thirty pesos out of the hundred sent by God. Who could be they except the employees at the post office? Therefore, he wrote a second letter to God to send him the rest of the money immediately. He asked him not to send money through the mail as the post office employees were a ‘bunch of crooks.’The situation at the end becomes quite ironic. It is ironic that men who collected pesos to help Lencho were called `a bunch of crooks, by him. He couldn’t know till the end who had really sent that money.
Q: “I wish I had the faith of the man who wrote this letter.” In the light of this statement describe Lencho’s character.
A: As soon as the postmaster received and read the letter written by Lencho to God, he expressed his feelings in the words by referring Lencho’s faith in God. Lencho, the writer of the letter was a simple farmer. He had a firm belief in God. Once, when his crop was destroyed by hailstones, he turned to God for help. He wrote a letter believing that God would not leave them to die of hunger and starvation. When he received a packet full of money, he was not the least surprised. Being simple in mind and generous by soul, he never knew that some generous soul had sent him the money in the name of God.
Q: What circumstances made Lencho write a letter to God? What does this act show about him?
A: The rain did come but came with disastrous hailstones that ruined everything. The leaves, plants, and flowers were ruined. The corn was totally destroyed. The hail had nothing left. That year Lencho and his family would have no corn. They would be on the verge of starvation. All such depression prospects worried Lencho. There was only one hope— help from God.Lencho and his wife were highly religious and had unshaken faith in God. They believed in God’s mercy and also believed that ‘no one dies of hunger’. So, Lencho decided to write a letter to God. He wrote that he needed immediate help. He wrote that without God’s help his family would face starvation. He needed a hundred pesos in order to sow his fields and live until the fresh crop came. He wrote the letter and wrote ‘To God’ on the envelope and dropped it into the mailbox.
Q: Lencho described the post-office employees as a ‘bunch of crooks’. Were they really a bunch of crooks? How would you describe them?
A: A crook is a person who cheats others. He earns his living by dishonest means Lencho requested God for a 100 pesos. He received a letter in the mail. When he opened it he found 70 pesos in it. He thought that the post-office employees had taken the rest of 30 pesos. So he called them a bunch of crooks. But in fact, they were kind and generous people. They did not want to shake Lencho’s faith in God. So they raised money to help him. But they could not raise 100 pesos. So they put 70 pesos in an envelope and addressed it to Lencho. The post-office employees were good people. They did an act of kindness and Charity. It was wrong for Lencho to call them a ‘bunch of crooks’.
Q: Think about the statement:“Faith can move mountains.” Do you think that this feeling had been in Lencho’s mind and so he could have been able to write a letter to God? Throw light on his feelings.
A: Without any doubt, I can say that this statement has a great importance. This statement can give a great strength to anyone who is about to fall deep down in earth, reason may be different. According to me, this is true that Lencho has deep faith in God. Because of his faith in God, he wrote a letter to God. When he got seventy pesos, once again he wrote a letter to God to get the remaining amount. So we can say that his feelings for God were very powerful.
Q: (i) What did the postmaster need to answer the letter? How did he collect it?(ii) How did Lencho react to help?
A: (i)Lencho’s crop had been destroyed. He needed God’s help. So he wrote a letter to God. He posted the letter. At the post-office, a postman took the letter out of the letterbox. He laughed at reading the address. He showed the letter to the postmaster. The postmaster also laughed. But he praised Lencho’s firm faith in God. He did not want to shake this faith. He was very kind. He decided to help Lencho. He and the post-office employees collected some money. The postmaster gave a part of his salary. They put the money into an envelope and addressed it to Lencho. (ii)The next Sunday Lencho came to the post-office. He asked if there was any letter for him. The postman gave him the envelope. Lencho opened the letter. He found that the money was less than what he had requested for. He thought that God could not have made a mistake. He wrote another letter to God. He asked God to send him the rest of the money. But he should not send it through the mail as the post-office employees were a ‘bunch of crooks’.
Q: Show Lencho’s faith and confidence in God with examples from the lesson.
A: Lencho had full faith in the help of God. The following sentences in the story tell us about it. ‘Lencho thought only of his one hope: `the help of God’, whose eyes, as he had been instructed, see everything, even what is deep in one’s conscience.’  Again, Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on seeing the money in the envelope—such was his confidence. But he became angry when he counted the money. ‘God could not have made a mistake nor could he have denied Lencho what he had requested. The above facts from the text prove his deep faith and confidence in God.
Q: The postmaster represents such people who still believe in helping others mention those values of the postmaster which you would like to emulate in yourself. Write in 100-120 words.
A: The postmaster was a kind, generous, helpful, amiable and God-fearing man. He received a letter from Lencho which was written to God asking for 100 pesos so that he could sow his fields again. The postman felt sympathetic towards Lencho. He decided to help Lencho. He gave up a part of his salary and asked all other employees to help. Even friends were made to contribute to the cause of charity and he managed to collect 70 pesos. He sent the money to Lencho along with a reply. He did so in order to preserve the man’s faith in God. This shows the postmaster was a nice man at heart.
Q: How do you think the postmaster felt when he received Lencho’s second letter? What do you think he did?
A: When Lencho opened the letter, he found only seventy pesos in it. He thought that God could not make a mistake. Perhaps the post office employees had cheated him. He wrote another letter to God. He wrote that the post office employees were a bunch of crooks. The story does not tell us what the postmaster felt when he received the second letter. Perhaps he felt shocked. It is possible that he realized that sometimes even good intentions are misunderstood. I think he met Lencho and explained everything to him. He told him that the post-office employees were not a bunch of crooks. In fact, they were kind and helpful. They had collected money to help him.
Q: Why did Lencho need God’s help?
A: Lencho was a simple farmer. He was very hard-working. His crops had always been good. One year, he wished that there should be some rain so that his crop would be better. Lencho was sure that the rain would come. In the evening it started raining. But soon the rain changed into a hailstorm. The hail fell on the house, the garden, the hillside and the corn-field. The field looked white as if it had been covered with salt. No leaves were left on the trees. The flowers were gone from the plants. Lencho’s crops were completely destroyed. His heart was filled with sorrow. But he had faith in God. He was sure that God would help him. He wanted God’s help for sowing seed and for living until the next harvest.
Q: Writing a letter to God for help really shows not only the unshaken faith in God of the writer Lencho but also shows his utter simplicity and innocence. Comment.
A: Lencho was a simple and hardworking farmer who worked like an ox in his fields. When the heavy fall of hailstones destroyed his corn totally, he and his family were rather on the verge of starvation. He was left with one hope, help from God. He believed that God was all-merciful and hears the call of those who are of a clear conscience. He requested him to send a hundred pesos immediately to help him to sow his fields. He and his family also needed some money to live on until the fresh crop came. Writing a letter to God and addressing it `To God’ shows the writer’s unshaken faith in God. He was a simple man not distrusting that such a letter could reach God. His innocence and firm belief in God’s mercy even deeply impressed and influenced the postmaster who decided to answer his letter. He didn’t want to shake the writer’s faith in God. He collected and sent 70 pesos as help signing the letter with one word, ‘God’. Lencho had so much faith in God and his mercy that he didn’t show any surprise when he received the money sent to him. He wrote another letter requesting him to send the rest of the money immediately but not through the postal mail as the post office employees were a ‘bunch of crooks’.
Q: Draw a character sketch of Lencho, the farmer in about 120-150 words.
A: Lencho was a simple man as farmers usually are everywhere. He was a man of limited means and earned his living by farming his fields. His older sons helped him in farming activities. His wife did the same but also managed the kitchen and other household works. Lencho was highly religious. So was his wife. He had unshaken faith in God. He believed that God always helps people with a clear conscience. Therefore, when he lost all hopes and he and his family were on the verge of starvation, he looked towards God for help. His deep faith in God even impressed the postmaster who decided to help him. He was strong and sturdy like an ox. Not only that, he worked day and night in the fields. Being a farmer, he had a deep knowledge about the weather, the winds and the rains of his region. He was simple-hearted. He was rustic and inhabitable and thought. He was a little educated to write a letter. He shows his innocence by trying to have a correspondence with God directly. He wrote ‘To God’ on the top of the envelope and posted the letter into the mail-box. While he had unshaken faith in God, he mistrusted the motives of men. He could never know and nor did he ever try to know who had sent him those seventy pesos to help him. It is quite ironic that he abused his helpers by calling them ‘a bunch of crooks’.
Q: “If you don’t help me, my family and I will go hungry this year.” Lencho had faith in God but he didn’t manage to solve the problem by himself. Did he lack the courage to resolve his matter himself? What values did he lack? Explain it in 100-120 words.
A: Lencho was a hardworking farmer. He was completely dependent upon the crops of his fields. His annual crop was completely destroyed due to heavy rains and hailstorms. In the entire village, there was no one to help him during the times of financial crisis. He had a firm belief in God and hence wrote a letter requesting Him to send 100 pesos so that he could sow his fields again till the next crop. This act did not prove that he lacked the courage to resolve his problem but shows that he did not have any option left for himself. He had a firm belief in God. He was an ox of a man but lacked money to stand again.
Q: Write a brief summary of the story ‘A Letter to God’.
A: Lencho was a simple farmer. He was very hard-working. But one year, his harvest was completely destroyed by the hailstorm. He had firm faith in God. He wrote a letter to God asking for a hundred pesos. The postmaster saw the letter. He decided to help Lencho. He collected money from his employees. He gave some part of his own salary also. But the money was less than what Lencho had asked for. The postmaster put the money into an envelope and addressed it to Lencho. Next Sunday Lencho came to collect his letter. When he counted the money he became angry. He wrote another letter to God. He asked God to send him the rest of the money. But he asked God not to send money through the mail as the employees of the post-office were a ‘bunch of crooks’.
Q: Why did the postmaster and his employees decide to help Lencho? Was their effort appreciated by the receiver of that help?
A: Lencho was a simple-hearted farmer who had tremendous faith in God. The heavy hailstones destroyed his corn. There was only one hope — help from God. So, Lencho wrote a letter to God describing his and his family’s miserable condition. He requested for a hundred pesos to help in sowing the crop and living till the next crop came. The postmaster himself, a generous man, first laughed at the idea of Lencho’s having a correspondence with God. However, he soon became serious. He was highly impressed by Lencho’s unshaken faith in God. He didn’t want to break his faith in God. So he decided to answer the letter and help Lencho.  He needed something more than goodwill. He asked his employees to collect money for this cause. He also contributed a part of his salary. All in all, they collected 70 pesos. The postmaster put the money in an envelope and mailed it to Lencho. He wrote a single word as a signature, God. Ironically, this noble act of charity by the postmaster and employees was not appreciated by Lencho. On the contrary, he called them ‘a bunch of crooks’ who embezzled the remaining 30 pesos. He never knew who the real helpers were. He only wrote God not to send the remaining 30 pesos through the mail as the post office employees were a ‘bunch of crooks’.

Chapter: a-question-of-trust
Q: What does Horace Danby like to collect?
A: Horace Danby likes to collect rare and expensive books.
Q: Why was it not difficult for Horace to open the safe?
A: It was not difficult for Horace Danby to open the safe because he had lived with locks and safes all his life. The burglar alarm was poorly built. He cut the wire without any difficulty.
Q: How did Horace fulfill his desire of reading books after he was arrested?
A: After Horace was arrested, he became the assistant librarian in the prison and fulfilled his desire for reading books.
Q: What do you think is the meaning of the phrase ‘honor among thieves’?
A: The phrase ‘honor among thieves’ means that thieves have their code of conduct. One thief is honest to the other thief. They never betray one another.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: Who is the real culprit in this story, the lady or Horace? How did he/she manage to rob the safe without leaving a single fingerprint?
A: In this story, the real culprit is the young lady. She managed to trick Horace for breaking the safe for her. She did not even touch the safe herself. She managed to get all the jewels. She had to do no physical exercise for this. In this way, she managed to rob the safe without leaving a single fingerprint.
Q: What advice did the lady give Horace regarding his hay fever? Was she really interested in his health?
A: The lady told Horace that he could get rid of the disease if he found out which plant had given him the disease. She advised him that he should see a doctor. Actually, she was not interested in his health. She was just trying to be friendly and sympathetic.
Q: What did Horace Danby hear from the doorway?
A: Horace Danby heard a voice from the doorway. It was the voice of a lady. As Horace Danby has sneezed loudly, therefore the lady asked what it was and he replied that it was due to hay fever.
Q: How did Horace know all the details of the house?
A: Horace had been studying the house for the past two weeks. Moreover, a magazine article had described this house, giving a plan of all the rooms and a picture of the room. There were also the details of the safe hidden behind the safe.
Q: How did the lady in red convince Horace Danby to open the lock?
A: The lady told Horace Danby that she had promised her husband to take her jewels to the hank but she left them in the safe. She had forgotten the numbers to open the safe and wanted to wear the jewels to a party. Horace Danby believed her and opened the safe for her.
Q: How did the flowers cause him trouble?
A: Horace Danby had an allergy for flowers, especially during the pollen season. Who flowers are nearby, he got sneezing. The only cure for it was to stay away from those path flowers.
Q: Why did Horace Danby feel sure of his success in that year’s robbery?
A: Horace Danby felt sure of his success in that year’s robbery as he had been studying room, paths and gardens of the house at Shot over Grange for two weeks. He knew that the family was in London and two servants who lived in the house had gone to watch a movie that afternoon.
Q: How did the lady spoil his plan?
A: The lady posed as the owner of the house in front of Horace. Horace got scared and believed her. She ask him to open the safe as she had forgotten the password. Horace opened the safe and handed over the jewels to her. Hence, Horace’s plan of robbing the safe was spoiled.
Q: Do you think that the young woman in red proved far smarter than Horace Danby? Give reasons.
A: Definitely, the young woman in red proved far smarter than Horace Danby. She played her part of being the lady of the house with complete perfection. She was an example of self-confidence. She didn’t show any hesitation. She spoke and acted with an air of complete confidence and authority. Poor Horace became a puppet who couldn’t take himself out of her spell. She threatened to call the police and made him open the safe, while Horace was later caught and arrested. She decamped with the jewels.
Q: Did Horace Danby get the jewels from the Grange safe? Then why did the Police arrest him?
A: Horace Danby did not get the jewels from the Grange safe but he was arrested by the police as his fingerprints were traced on the lighter which he gave to the lady to light the cigarette. He was eager to please the lady to win her favour.
Q: How did Horace enter Shot over Grange?
A: Horace had seen the housekeeper hang the key in the hook outside the kitchen door. He came out from behind the garden wall. He put on his gloves, took the key and opened the door of the kitchen and entered Shot over Grange.
Q: What story did Horace tell the police when he was arrested?
A: He told the police that he had not stolen any jewels. He said that he broke open the safe for the young wife of the owner of the house. But the wife was herself an old lady of about sixty with grey-hair. So, none believed his story.
Q: What precautions did Horace make before reaching the safe? Name three of them.
A: Horace Danby took the following precautions before committing the theft:
Q: What does the author tell us about Horace Danby’s life?
A: Horace Danby was unmarried and fifty year old and lived with a housekeeper who bothered about his health. He had hay fever. He made locks and was successful in his business. He was good and respectable but not honest.
Q: How did Horace Danby manage to get rare and expensive books?
A: Horace Danby loved rare and expensive books. He bought them secretly through an agent. But for this, he had to rob a safe every year because he did not have enough money to buy these books. In this way, he managed to get these rare and expensive books.
Q: Why does he steal every year?
A: He used to steal every year so that he could buy the rare and expensive books that he loved to collect. He planned meticulously before attempting a burglary, stole enough to last twelve months and secretly bought the books through an agent.
Q: When and why did the woman in red say, “Society must be protected from men like you”? Doesn’t it sound ironical?
A: Horace assured the woman in red that he would not hurt her. She must forget she ever met him. It made her angry. She couldn’t let him go, otherwise, he would rob someone else. Society must be protected from people like him. It sounds ironic because she herself was a thief and had come for the same purpose for which Horace was there in the house.
Q: Describe how Horace Danby planned his work?
A: Horace Danby studied the house at Shotover Grange for two weeks. He studied its rooms, its electric wiring, its paths and its garden. He was sure that the family was in London. The two servants had gone to the movies and they would not come back before four hours. He came out from behind the garden wall and entered the house.
Q: Why did Horace Danby prefer books to collect paintings?
A: Horace Danby had a passion for books. Collecting and buying rare and expensive books was his passionate hobby. He resorted to robbing a safe every year to buy them. When the preference between collecting books and paintings came, he chose the former. Paintings took up too much space. In a small house like his, books were a better choice.
Q: Who is speaking to Horace Danby?
A: A lady standing in the doorways is speaking to Horace Danby. She is young and pretty, and is dressed in red. She said she had come just in time, or else her family would have been robbed by Horace. She, thus, pretended to be one of the members of the family living at Shotover Grange.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: Horace Danby was a meticulous planner but still he faltered. Where did he go wrong and why?
A: Horace Danby failed to get enough information about real occupants of the house. He seemed to be too occupied with collecting other little details and information about house map, wiring and location of valuable things. Although he was smart enough to know the dog’s actual name but overlooked getting identity of each and every occupant of the house. Once he was in problem then probably his clever mind gave way to carelessness leading him to open the safe without wearing gloves.
Q: “Horace had some hope because she seemed to be amused at meeting him.” Why did Horace feel so? Did he consider the young lady compassionate towards him? Did he find her free from bias? Discuss the values Horace should have imbibe understanding of the person in 100-120 words.
A: Horace was a fifty-year-old man who used to rob only to buy rare and expensive. This time he decided to rob Shot over Grange. But as soon as they entered the room, a Young lady appeared. She posed to be the lady of the ruse. She was very confident in her Mat, inner of talking. She talked about high ideals like pro-acting. The society from robbers like conium racked. Then she tried to be polite and nice to him. On hearing her, Horace felt that he had a hope of escaping. He found her a bit compassionate towards him. He was amused at Horace. She acted in quite a subtle manner and showed her sympathy and admiration towards a simple and honest man. He could not judge her ace. She made Horace promise that he would never commit the crime again. Horace was cleverness and shrewdness and hence later got arrested for stealing the jewels which he did not steal.
Q: “Horace Danby was good and respectable but not completely honest”. Why do you think this description is apt for Horace? Why can’t he be categorized as a typical thief?
A: “Horace Danby was good and respectable—but not completely honest”. This description is apt for Horace. He was about fifty years old. He robbed only from rich people. His purpose of stealing money was only to buy rare and expensive books. He stole only once every year. His intention to use the booty in buying books was good. However, the fact that he stole to achieve this intention showed that he was not completely honest. He cannot be categorized as a typical thief because he did not steal to eat or drink and was not a regular offender. He did not harm anybody during the act. He had a house. He made locks, had two people to help him, and was successful in his business. He only stole enough money to buy the books. For a couple of days, he even kept his promises to the lady he met at Shotover Grange by not stealing or planning any robbery.
Q: How did the lady in red turn out to be smarter than Horace Danby?
A: Horace Danby was a cleaver thief. He lived a life of a respectable and successful businessman. He used to make locks. He was fond of rare and expensive books. He did not have enough money to buy these books. He used to rob a safe for this once in a year. He was very clever. He made his plan in such a way that he was never caught. He spent a lot of time in planning his mission. He never left any sign of theft but the lady who was another thief proved herself cleverer than Danby. She was a great actress as well. She pretended to be the owner of the house. She tricked Danby who opened the safe for her and handed over the jewels. Horace was so nervous that he did not realise that he had no gloves in his hand. The lady had no tools, no gloves but managed to rob the safe without leaving any evidence against her. Thus, we can say that the lady was cleverer than Danby.
Q: Give a character-sketch of Horace Danby in your own words. How was he outmaneuvered by the lady in red?
A: Horace Danby was about fifty years old and unmarried. Everyone thought him a good and honest citizen. He was otherwise very well and happy except for attacks of hay fever in summer. He made locks and was fairly successful at his business. Horace Danby was good and respectable — but not completely honest. He used to rob a safe every year. He did so because he needed money to buy books. Horace had a passion for buying rare and costly books. With that money, he secretly bought the books he loved through an agent. Like a professional thief, he made a lot of preparations. He made it sure that every year’s robbery was going to be as successful as all the others. He studied the location of the house at Shotover Grange—its rooms, its electric wiring, its paths and its gardens in details. He also came to know that the two servants of the house were out to the movies. He also knew where was safe and it’s key. He befriended the little dog by calling his right name.  In spite of all his professionalism, Horace Danby proved a novice in judging the lady in red. The lady in red behaved with so much confidence and authority that Horace became totally a puppet in her hands. Easily passing off as the lady of the house, she made Horace open the safe without wearing his gloves. While the lady in red decamped with the jewels, Horace was sent to prison.
Q: Give a character-sketch of the lady in red highlighting how she outwitted Horace Danby.
A: We don’t get any information regarding the past history of the lady in red as we know about Horace’s past. Her whole personality remains wrapped in mystery until the end. Only when the identity of the real lady of the house is unfolded, we come to know that she is a thief. She is the real culprit. The lady in red comes there with the only purpose of committing a theft in the house like Horace. She cleverly decamps with the jewels while Horace is sent to prison. The lady in red is gifted with a rare personality. She is full of confidence. She acts like a perfect actress presenting herself as the lady of the house. Her gestures, confidence and convincing power are enough to convince Horace. He turns out quite a novice in understanding and judging the lady in red and her motive. She dominates the proceeding. Horace only proves a puppet in her hands. She exploits his fear of going to prison. She makes him open the safe without his gloves. She convinced him that she needs those jewels to wear them to a party that night. Horace willingly hands over the jewels and she decamps with them. Only when the grey-haired, sharp-tongued woman appears as the real lady of the house, we come to know that the lady in red was a professional and crafty thief much smarter than Horace.
Q: Horace Danby represents such people who adopt the wrong ways to fulfill their wishes. What values would you like such people to imbibe to reform themselves? Write in about 100-120 words.
A: Horace Danby was a successful businessman. He was about fifty years respectable citizen but had a habit that led him to do robberies. Danby loved rare, expensive books and to get them he used to rob a safe every year. Every year he planned carefully just to get what he wanted. Danby adopted wrong ways to fulfill his wishes and hence, later got trapped in a plot by a thief like him. People should imbibe good values. They should learn that hard work is the only key to success One should work hard to fulfill his desires. I think such people should imbibe the values of honesty, responsibility, hard work, dedication, self-confidence in order to reform themselves.
Q: “Lying and stealing are next door neighbours”. Comment.
A: A path of truthfulness and honesty is always better than an easy path of deceit. Horace Danby was a thief, he robbed safe every year. But, in the end he was be fooled by another thief and was arrested by the police. Stealing or lying cannot bring happiness or success. A truthful and honest person always leads a happy and peaceful life. He does not have to live with any kind of guilt. Stealing or lying robs one of peace. Those who are honest do not live a life of tension and are able to get peace of mind too.
Q: Our sins never go unpunished. Horace Danby ultimately had to go to prison. This shows that inspite of planning a crime intelligently and carefully a criminal can’t escape the law— Explain / discuss.
A: A path of truthfulness and honesty is always better than an easy path of deceit. Horace Danby was a thief, he robbed safe every year. But, in the end he was befooled by another thief and was arrested by the police. Stealing or lying cannot bring happiness or success. A truthful and honest person always leads a happy and peaceful life. He does not have to live with any kind of guilt. Stealing or lying robs one of peace. Those who are honest do not live a life of tension and are able to get peace of mind too.
Q: Which of the two thieves lacked ‘honour’ in the story ‘A Question of Trust’?
A: “There is honour among Thieves” means that ‘dishonest people may have certain standards of behaviour which they will respect’. The young lady pretended to be the owner of the house and innocently asked Horace Danby to-open the safe as she would need the jewels to wear to the party that day. Horace Danby found himself trapped in a tricky situation and could not make out how to escape. He readily opened the safe unwittingly leaving his fingerprints. He was arrested and nobody believed that the lady of the house asked him to open the safe.

Chapter: a-triumph-of-surgery
Q: What was Mrs. Pumphrey’s reaction when Tricki showed little enthusiasm for exertion?
A: She was shocked and worried. She thought that Tricki was seriously ill. She thought that he had been suffering from malnutrition.
Q: Which two suggestions did Dr Herriot give to Mrs Pumphrey at the initial stage? Did shefollow?
A: Dr Herriot suggested Mrs Pumphrey to cutdown on the sweet things given to Tricki. He asked her to provide more exercise to the dog.
Q: What does ‘I’ refer to in this story?
A: In this story, T refers to the veterinary surgeon, Mr Herriot.
Q: What was Mrs. Pumphrey’s reaction when the doctor said that Tricki must be taken to the hospital for a fortnight?
A: Hearing this from the doctor’s mouth she almost swooned. She was sure that Tricki would pine and die if he did not see her every day.
Q: Why did Mr. Herriot ask Mrs. Pumphrey to admit Tricki in a hospital?
A: Dr. Herriot asked Mrs. Pumphrey to admit Tricki in a hospital because instead of cutting down upon his food and making him exercise, she was pampering him.
Q: What does she do to help him? Is she wise in this?
A: She calls the doctor to help Tricki. Yes, her decision is wise. The doctor suggests that Tricki should be hospitalized. She gets upset and wails, but lets the dog go with the doctor.
Q: What was the real disease that Tricki was suffering from?
A: Actually, Tricki didn’t have physical disease. He had a vomiting problem because of overfeeding. He was lazy because he did not have any physical exercise.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: Why was Dr. Herriot confident that Tricki will be in hospital soon?
A: Tricki was tottering (move in an unsteady way) slowly in the house. He was not eating anything, not even his favorite dishes and besides, he had bouts of vomiting. Dr. Herriot was sure that if his food was not cut down and more exercise was not given to him, he would be really ill soon.
Q: What did Mrs Pumphrey do to bring him back to normal health? Was she successful?
A: When Mrs Pumphrey found Tricki weak, she started giving him extra diet between meals to build him , up. She gave him some malt and cod-liver oil and a bowl of Horlicks at night. She never forgot to give him cream cakes and chocolates which Tricki really loved. She was hot successful rather she put her dog in more trouble. He started gaining weight which made fys condition worse.
Q: How does Dr. Herriot treats Tricki?
A: Dr. Herriot cut down Tricki food and made him exercise. For the first three days jobs didn’t give him food but only water. He did not give any medicinal treatment but made him all day with the dogs. He discovered the joys of being bowled over, tramped on and squashed every few minutes. He enjoyed a lot along with his recovery.
Q: Describe the `parting scene’ between Tricki and Mrs. Pumphrey’s household.
A: Mrs. Pumphrey was wailing. The entire staff was roused (awakened). The maids rushed in and out bringing his beds and bowls to the doctor’s car. When the doctor drove the car away everybody in the house was in tears.
Q: What was the only fault of Tricki as diagnosed by Dr. Herriot?
A: Dr. Herriot knew that overindulgence and pampering of Tricki’s mistress, Mrs. Pumphrey created problems for him. The only fault of Tricki was his greed for food. He had never known to refuse food. Overfeeding and not giving him proper exercise made him hugely fat and dull.
Q: Why was Mr. Herriot shocked at Tricki’s appearance?
A: Tricki had become hugely fat. He looked like a bloated sausage. His eyes were bloodshot and rheumy. His tongue lolled from his jaws. So, Mr. Herriot was shocked at Tricki’s appearance.
Q: Why did Mrs Pumphery make a frantic call to Dr Herriot?
A: Suddenly Tricki stopped eating. He refused even his favourite dishes and had bouts of vomiting. He spent all the time lying on rug, panting and did not do anything. So Mrs Pumphrey was distraught and made a frantic call to Dr Herriot.
Q: What was Mr. Herriot’s strict advice? Did Mrs. Pumphrey heed his advice? What excuses did she make?
A: Mr. Herriot’s strict advice was to cut down on sweet things and to give him plenty of exercises. But Mrs. Pumphrey did not heed (pay attention) to this advice. She thought Tricki was weak. So she was giving him cream cakes and chocolates. Tricki had very little exercise because the gardener was unwell.
Q: How did Tricky treat his mistress when she went to collect him?
A: When Tricki saw his mistress, he took off from Mr. Herriot’s arms. He took a tremendous leap. He sailed into Mrs. Pumphrey’s lap. He swarmed over her. He licked her face and barked.
Q: What step did Dr Herriot take to save Tricki?
A: Dr Herriot immediately hospitalised Tricki for about a fortnight as it was necessary to part him from his mistress. Tricki’s only problem was overfeeding which he knew. Tricki needed dieting which was possible only in absence of Mrs Pumphrey. He stopped giving food to Tricki. He was given only plenty of water.
Q: Why was the entire staff of Mrs. Pumphrey at work while Tricki was going to the hospital?
A: Tricki was Mrs. Pumphrey beloved dog, and when he was going to the hospital, the entire staff got to work. His day and night beds, favorite cushions, toys and rubber rings, and food bowls were loaded into the narrator’s car by them.
Q: Describe the gradual progress of Tricki at the surgery.
A: Tricki’s main problem was his greed for food. For two days, Dr. Herriot gave no food but plenty of water to the dog. On the first day, Tricki lay motionless on the carpet. On the second day, he started showing some interest in his surroundings. On the third day, he began to whimper when he heard the dogs in the yard. From then on, his progress was rapid. He started for his share of food and hunting rats at night.
Q: Why was Dr. Herriot really worried about Tricki?
A: When Dr. Herriot saw Tricki with his mistress, he was really worried. He was shocked at his appearance. The dog had become hugely fat. His eyes were bloodshot and rheumy. His tongue lolled from his jaws. Naturally, the miserable condition of the dog made him really worried.
Q: Why was Tricki an uninteresting object for other dogs at the surgery?
A: When Tricki was brought to the surgery, all the household dogs surged around him but Tricki looked down at the noisy pack with dull eyes and lay motionless on the carpet. So after sniffing him for a few seconds, they found him an uninteresting object and moved away from him.
Q: Why was Tricki sent to the hospital?
A: Tricki had become sluggish as he had grown so fast that it became difficult for him to walk. He started panting all the time, kept on vomiting and stopped eating. He seemed very ill so he was hospitalized.
Q: The household dogs at the surgery rejected Tricki as “uninteresting objects.” Why?
A: At the surgery the household dogs surrounded Tricki. He looked at them with dull eyes. The other dogs sniffed him but he did not give any response. So they found him as an uninteresting object and rejected him.
Q: “I think 1 know a cure for you”. What was Dr Herriot’s ‘cure’ for Tricki?
A: Seeing the miserable condition of Tricki Dr Herriot at once decides to keep him away from his mistress Mrs Pumphrey for a while. So, he suggested that Tricki should be hospitalized for about a fortnight as he had to be kept upder observation.
Q: Why were the household dogs not interested in Tricki initially?
A: Answe Tricki was a newcomer in the house. Moreover, Tricki was very lethargic to play with them He was not comfortable there. But after a few days, Tricki started enjoying them. He discovered the joys of being bowled over, tramped on and squashed every few minutes. He became an accepted member of the gang.
Q: Why was Dr. Herriot tempted to keep Tricki on as a permanent guest?
A: Tricki was a pampered dog and his mistress, Mrs. Pumphrey was an overindulgent lady. For a happy period, Dr. Herriot and his partner had two eggs each for breakfast. Then there was a liberal inflow of wine and brandy. They were the days of deep content for him. He was naturally tempted to keep Tricki on as a permanent guest.
Q: What evidence do you get from the text about Tricki’s affluent living?
A: Tricki was loved by his mistress. She was very much concerned for him. She was rather blind in love. Tricki lived a more lavish life than any noraml human bring. He had a whole wardrobe of clothes for different weather, raincoat for wet days. Different bowls for different meals, toys, cushions, comfortable bed and what not. He was given rich diet including cream cakes and chocolates which he loved.
Q: What excuses did Mrs. Pumphrey give for not following Dr. Herriot’s advice? What was the effect of ignorance?
A: Dr. Herriot knew that the only fault of Tricki was his greed for food. Mrs. Pumphrey was an indulgent mistress and pampered Tricki with malt, cod-liver oil and bowls of Horlicks. Dr. Herriot had advised her to cut down on sweets and give him some exercise. Tricki was to be kept on a very strict diet. Mrs. Pumphrey told the doctor that it was very difficult. The result of ignoring the doctor’s advice was disastrous. Tricki lost his appetite and lay motionless on the carpet. He vomited again and again.
Q: Why did Mrs. Pumphrey treats Tricki in a special way?
A: Mrs. Pumphrey was an extremely rich lady but was foolishly indulgent in pampering her dog, Tricki. She served him with cream cakes, chocolates and cod-liver oil. She did so because she treated Tricki like her son.
Q: What makes you know that Mrs. Pumphrey was a rich lady?
A: Mrs. Pumphrey was a wealthy lady as she had many servants and maids also had a pet. She used to feed her pet with a lot of dishes, sweets and snacks. Moreover, she had a separate room and wardrobe for her pet. All these things show that she was a rich lady.
Q: How was Tricki accepted as a member of the gang and the other dogs started enjoying his company?
A: Tricki was out of danger. He started taking interest in his surroundings. On the third day, Joe, the greyhound and other dogs surrounded him. They rolled him over and inspected him. Tricki followed them to the garden. He was running and rolling down in their company. Now he was accepted as a member of the gang.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: Describe the ‘parting scene’ between Tricki and Mrs Pumphrey’s house hold?
A: The -only way to save Tricki was to take him away. When Mr Herriot was about to take him to his surgery for treatment, Mrs Pumphrey started wailing. The entire staff was roused and maids rushed in and out bringing his day bed, night bed, favourite cushions, toys and rubber rings and different bowls.As Mr Herriot moved off, Mrs Pumphrey, with a despairing cry, threw an armful of the little coats, through the window. Everybody was in tears. It was a sad and tearful parting.
Q: Describe the gradual progress of Tricki at the surgery.
A: Tricki’s main problem was his greed for food. For two days, Dr. Herriot gave no food but plenty of water to the dog. On the first day, Tricki lay motionless on the carpet. On the second day, he started showing some interest in his surroundings. On the third day, he began to whimper when he heard the dogs in the yard. From then on, his progress was rapid. He started for his share of food and hunting rats at night.
Q: Give a brief character sketch of Tricki.
A: Tricki is thoroughly pampered by his mistress Mrs Pumphrey. He has become hugely fat, like a bloated sausage with a leg at each comer. His eyes, bloodshot and rheumy, stares straight ahead his tongue lolled from his jaws. He is greedy and never refuses food. His mistress gives him some little extras between meals to build him up, some malt and cod-liver oil and a bowl of Horlicks at night to make him sleep. Above all, he gets cream cakes and chocolates. To make things worse he had been doing no exercise. When Tricki is sent to Vet. Hospital, the entire staff of Mrs Pumphrey’s house rush to bring his day bed, his night bed, favourite cushions, toys and rubber rings, breakfast bowl, lunch bowl, supper bowl. It all shows that Tricki has an affluent living.
Q: What excuses did Mrs. Pumphrey give for not following Dr. Herriot’s advice? What was the effect of ignorance?
A: Dr. Herriot knew that the only fault of Tricki was his greed for food. Mrs. Pumphrey was an indulgent mistress and pampered Tricki with malt, cod-liver oil and bowls of Horlicks. Dr. Herriot had advised her to cut down on sweets and give him some exercise. Tricki was to be kept on a very strict diet. Mrs. Pumphrey told the doctor that it was very difficult. The result of ignoring the doctor’s advice was disastrous. Tricki lost his appetite and lay motionless on the carpet. He vomited again and again.
Q: Write the brief character sketch of Mrs Pumphrey.
A: Mrs Pumphrey was a rich but eccentric lady. She was an ignorant kind of person. She had a pet dog Tricki, whom she loved more than anything. Her way of showing love was very different. She overfed Tricki. She showed her concern by giving him rich and extra diet between meals which finally made Tricki ill. She couldn’t bear Tricki doing exercise. She thought that it would make Tricki tired while it was necessary for him. She pampered her pet which had a wardrobe of clothes for every season, different bowls for each meal, toys and what not. Her way of loving was not normal. But she was also a kind- hearted lady who finally burst into tears while parting with her dog. She had all human qualities as she didn’t forget to thank Mr Herriot at the end.
Q: Herriot enjoyed the lavish (costly) meal during Tricki’s stay but still, he felt compelled (forced to do something) to inform Mrs. Pumphrey about the recovery of Tricki. Why did he not keep Tricki for a longer time? Did he feel concerned for Mrs. Pumphrey? Was it not in his attitude to break the trust of others. Discuss the values he possessed in 100-120 words.
A: Tricki was a fat dog, the pet of Mrs. Pumphrey. He became listless and seemed to have no energy and fell ill. So, Mrs. Pumphrey called the veterinary surgeon, Dr. Herriot for help. Dr. Herriot took Tricki to his surgery. He kept an eye on him for two days and gave him no food but plenty of water. At the end of the second day, he started showing some interest in his surroundings and on the third day, began to whimper (cry) on the sound of dogs. During his stay at the surgery, Mrs. Pumphrey started to bring round fresh eggs to a dozen at a time. She also sent bottles of wine and brandy for Tricki’s health. But that was consumed by Mr. Herriot and his partners. Hence, Herriot enjoyed the stay of Tricki. He did not want to keep Tricki for a longer time because he felt concerned for Mrs. Pumphrey. He did not want to separate the pet from his owner. He could understand Mrs. Pumphrey’s concern for the little dog. So he returned him back.
Q: Is the narrator as rich as Tricki’s mistress?
A: Though not clearly stated, there are instances in the story which suggest that the narrator is not as rich as Tricki’s mistress, Mrs Pumphrey. The narrator is able to provide Tricki with a warm loose box as a bed whereas at Mrs Pumphrey’s house, Tricki has a day bed, a night bed, cushions, toys, rubber rings, a breakfast bowl, a lunch bowl, a supper bowl, a whole wardrobe of tweed coats and perhaps many more things. When he arrives to take the dog with him, Mrs Pumphrey has her entire staff at her disposal to transfer all of Tricki’s belongings to the doctor’s car. Secondly, on hearing from the doctor about Tricki’s gradual recovery, Mrs Pumphrey sends along two dozen eggs at a time, along with bottles of wine and brandy—all in order to help in Tricki’s speedy recovery. Finally, when she calls upon the narrator to take her recovered dog back home, she comes in a chauffeur-driven “thirty feet of gleaming black metal” (an obvious reference to a limousine). All these instances point to the fact that Mrs Pumphrey lived a luxurious life.
Q: How does the doctor treat the dog?
A: The doctor knew that Tricki was not ill but just overweight qnd restless due to Mrs Pumphrey’s overindulgence in taking his care. So he decided not to give any food to Tricki, but plenty of water for two days. Slowly, the dog started showing interest in hi§-surroundings and began mixing with the other dogs at the surgery. On the third day, the doctor saw Tricki licking the empty supper bowls of the other dogs.  Next day, a separate bowl was kept for him and the doctor was pleased to note that Tricki had run to eat its food with enthusiasm. From that day onwards, his progress was rapid. He did not require any medical treatment and recovered quite well at the end.
Q: Herriot seems to be a duty-bound doctor who values others ’emotions’ than his personal interests. Elucidate the above statement. Mention those values of Herriot which you would like to emulate in yourself also and give reasons for the same. Write your answer in 100-120 words.
A: Herriot was a duty-bound veterinary doctor. He used to visit Mrs. Pumphrey’s house regularly for the regular check-up of her dog Tricki. Mrs. Pumphrey was a very rich lady who had pampered her dog. Dr Herriot was quite worried about Tricki health. He knew that the dog was over-fed by his owner. He advised Mrs. Pumphrey to keep him on a rich diet and give him a lot of exercises. But she didn’t bother. Hence, in order to improve Tricki health, he decided to take him away from Mrs. Pumphrey. He told her that ‘Tricki needed surgery. He made a Tricki cut down his diet and made him do certain exercises which improve his health. Although he knew Mrs. Pumphrey was very rich and much attached to the dog, he did not take any advantage of it. He just performed his duties and should also learn the same values in our life.
Q: Why is the doctor tempted to keep Tricki as a permanent guest?
A: Mrs Pumphrey has started bringing around eggs to build Tricki’s strength. Later, even bottles of wine and brandy began to arrive. The narrator and his partners started enjoying the eggs, wine and brandy meant for Tricki. According to the narrator, those were the days of deep content for him and his staff-starting with an extra egg in the morning, then the midday wine, and finally finishing off the day with brandy. This is the reason why the narrator is tempted to keep Tricki on as a permanent guest.
Q: How did Herriot save Tricki’s life?
A: Tricki was seriously ill. He refused food. He had bouts of vomiting. Mrs. Pumphrey was very much worried about him. She called Mr. Herriot who was a vet. Herriot and knew Tricki’s disease well. He told Mrs. Pumphrey that the dog must be hospitalized for a fortnight immediately. He carried the dog in his car to his surgery. There he put him in a separate room. He was given no food for two days but plenty of water. After two days the dog felt better. He started enjoying games with other dogs. In this way, Herriot cured Tricki of his illness without any medicine or surgery.
Q: Do you think Tricki was happy to go home? What do you think will happen now?
A: Yes, Tricki was very happy to go home. When the dog was brought into the surgery, he was ill. But in spite of that the dog got cured in two days without any medication. The doctor provided proper diet to Tricki and regular exercise also helped a lot in his speedy recovery. The dog regained his best health and was no longer restless.Now, I think Mrs Pumphrey may again go back to her old ways of treating Tricki with love and care or learning a lesson from what she experienced, she may mend her ways and make him an agile and healthier dog.
Q: Mrs. Pumphrey says, “This is ‘A Triumph of Surgery’. Why did she say so? Did she know what ‘, Ticki’s ailment was?
A: Tricki was seriously ill. He refused food. He had bouts of vomiting. Mrs. Pumphrey was very much worried about him. She called Dr. Herriot who was a vet surgeon. Dr. Herriot knew about Tricki’s disease. He took the dog to his surgery. He gave Tricki no food for two days. He gave him a lot of exercises. When Mrs. Pumphrey went to Dr. Herriot’s surgery to take Tricki back she found him totally transformed. He had been very lazy and flabby. But now he had been transformed into a lithe and hard-muscled animal. All this made him say, “This is ‘A Triumph of Surgery’. No, Mrs. Pumphrey did not know about Tricki’s ailment. She also did not know how he was cured.
Q: What would you have done if you were(i) A member of the staff in Mrs Pumphrey’s household.(ii) A neighbour? What would your life have been like, in general?
A: (i) If I were a member of the staff in Mrs Pumphrey’s household, my life would have been miserable. But I would have had no option but to follow her orders as for Mrs Pumphrey, her dog waseverything. She loved her dog more than anything in the world. She always overfed him. So I would spend most of my time in feeding Tricki.I would have helped Tricki by taking him out for a stroll so that he could burn his extra fat. (ii) If I were her neighbour, I would advise her and tell how her excess love and silly behaviour were doing more harm than good to Tricki. I know she would not listen to me. She would tell me more about her loveliness and attachment to Tricki. I would have no option but to listen to her silly talk.
Q: Give a character sketch of Dr James Herriot.
A: Dr James Herriot, no doubt, was a competent veterinary surgeon. He was really worried about Tricki. He understood that the real fault of the dog was his greed for food. He never refused food. The dog had become hugely fat and listless. Dr Herriot instructed Mrs Pumphrey to keep Tricki on a very strict diet. He also asked her to give him a lot of exercises. Dr Herriot also suggested cuttting down sweets to him. He advised her that Tricki must be hospitalised for a fortnight under his observation. Dr James Herriot was practical and pragmatic (sensible). He didn’t give any medical treatment to the dog. The dog was not given any food but lots of water. His method worked. Tricki’s recovery was surprisingly rapid. Tricki was transformed into a flexible and hard-muscled dog. He was not only out of danger but was soon handed over to his mistress. The grateful mistress thanked Dr. Herriot and called his feat (achievement)”A Triumph of Surgery”.  Dr. James Herriot was clever enough to enjoy the best of both worlds. He was tempted to keep Tricki on as a permanent guest. It was a happy period for Dr. Herriot and his friends. He enjoyed eggs for breakfast, and wine and brandy for lunch.
Q: Describe Tricki’s stay at Dr. James Herriot’s surgery, highlighting his behaviour and his rapid recovery.
A: Dr. Herriot found out quite early what was the real problem with Tricki. He knew that Tricki’s only weakness was his greed for food. He, therefore, wanted Mrs. Pumphrey to keep Tricki on a strict diet and give him plenty of exercises. Dr Herriot instructed her that the dog be hospitalised under his observation for a fortnight. At the surgery, Tricki looked down at the noisy dogs with dull eyes. He lay motionless on the carpet. The other dogs ignored him as an uninteresting object. A bed was made in a warm loose box next to the other dogs. For two days, Dr. Herriot kept an eye on him. He gave him no food but plenty of water. He gave no medical treatment to Tricki.  Dr. Herriot’s practical treatment worked. First, Tricki started taking an interest in his surroundings. His appetite returned. He started running along with the other dogs in the garden joining in their friendly barkings. Then, Tricki’s stay at the surgery became quite enjoyable. His indulgent mistress gave him fresh eggs, wine and brandy. Even Dr. Herriot was tempted to keep Tricki as a permanent guest. However, Tricki’s recovery was quite rapid and he was handed over to his mistress. The grateful Mrs. Pumphrey thanked Dr. Herriot and called his feat “A Triumph of Surgery”.

Chapter: bholi
Q: What were the two steps taken by Ramlal to persuade Bishamber to marry Bholi?
A: Ramlal persuaded Bishamber to marry Bholi by giving him the dowry of five thousand rupees.
Q: Why did Sulekha start stammering?
A: Sulekha could not speak until she was five. When at last she learned to speak she started stammering because other children often made fun of her and mimicked her.
Q: Why was Sulekha nicknamed Bholi?
A: Sulekha was nicknamed Bholi because she was a simpleton. She was mentally slow and anybody could befool her.
Q: Why did the Tehsildar come to Ramlal’s village? What did he ask Ramlal to do?
A: The Tehsildar came to Ramlal’s village to inaugurate the primary school. He asked Ramlal to set an example for others by sending his daughters to school.
Q: What was Ramlal’s wife reaction?
A: His wife was an orthodox village woman. She was against the idea of sending her daughters to school. She thought that education would affect their marriage prospects adversely.
Q: Why did she agree to send Bholi to school?
A: She thought that education would ruin the marriage prospects of their daughters but Bholi was a simpleton. There was no possibility of her marriage. So she agreed to send Bholi to school.
Q: Which incident touched her heart?
A: All the girls were laughing at her. The teacher called her by name in her soft and soothing voice. This touched her heart because she had never been called in that loving way.
Q: Why did Bishamber’s marriage with Bholi not take place?
A: Bishamber’s marriage with Bholi did not take place because Bholi refused to marry a greedy man. She also realised that Bishamber was trying to exploit her father due to her looks.
Q: Why is Bholi’s father worried about her?
A: Bholi’s father is worried about her as she has neither good looks nor intelligence. He did not know how he would find a suitable groom for her.
Q: Does Bholi enjoy her first day at school?
A: Yes, Bholi enjoys her first day at school as she was glad to find so many girls almost of her own age present there. She hoped that one of these girls might become her friend.
Q: Does she find her teacher different from the people at home?
A: Yes, she finds her teacher different from the people at home as the teacher was affectionate, polite and this touched her heart.
Q: Why do Bholi’s parents accept Bishamber’s marriage proposal?
A: Bholi’s parents accept Bishamber’s marriage proposal because if they don’t accept it, she would not be married for the rest of her life.
Q: Why does the marriage not take place?
A: The marriage does not take place because the groom demanded dowry.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: Did Bholi enjoy her first day in school? What made her happy on this very day?
A: It was a mixed day for Bholi. She was happy to see the girls of her age. She was fascinated with the colourful pictures on the wall of the classrooms. But when the teacher asked her name she could not answer properly and other girls laughed at her. She cried. But her teacher’s soft words made her happy on this very day.
Q: How does she become a masterpiece?
A: The teacher transformed a simpleton girl into a well-behaved and confident girl. Bholi was a foolish and stammering girl. The teacher put in all her hard work in transforming her into a mentally strong and well-educated girl. It was really a masterpiece of the teacher.
Q: “God cannot be everywhere, so he created Mothers”. Do you think Bholi’s mother complies with this statement? Give at least three reasons to support your answer.
A: Bholi’s mother does not comply with this statement- Following are the reasons for it:
Q: How was Bholi different from the other children at home?
A: When Bholi was 10 months old, she fell from a cot. This damaged a part of her brain and affected her intelligence. She became a slow learner, a retarded child. So, she was called Bholi’ meaning a simpleton. When she was two years old, she had an attack of smallpox that left pockmarks on her face and she looked ugly. Rest of her brothers and sisters were normal.
Q: What two actions did Bholi take to stop her marriage to Bishamber?
A: Bholi’s marriage was going to take place with Bishamber who himself was forty-five or fifty years old. He also limped and had two children from his first wife. Even then he demanded 5000 rupees as dowry. Bholi stopped the marriage by throwing away the garland in the fire. She threw away the veil and asked her father to take back the money and refused to marry Bishamber.
Q: How did Bholi console her father in the end?
A: Bholi consoled her father that even if she did not get married, she would take care of her parents in their old age. She also tells them that she would teach in the same school where she had learned so much.
Q: Give example from the text to show that Bholi was a neglected child.
A: Due to her physical appearance Bholi was neglected by her parents. New dresses were made for her sisters; the old dresses of her sisters were passed on to her. No one ever cared to mind or wash her clothes. She was sent to school as her mother believed her to be a burden.
Q: Give detail about Ramlal’s children.
A: Ramlal had seven children-four daughters and three sons. All of his children except Bholi were healthy. His sons studied in schools and colleges. Bholi was his youngest daughter. She was a backward child
Q: What did the Tehsildar suggest to Ramlal?
A: The Tehsildar had come to the village to open the first primary school for girls. He told Ramlal that as a revenue official he is the representative of the government in the village, and so should set an example for the villagers by sending his daughters to school.
Q: What ideas do you form of Ramlal’s personality?
A: Ramlal was the revenue officer of the village. He was a prosperous farmer and had seven children. He was orthodox. He did not believe in the ideology of sending girls to school as it would be difficult to find a good match for them. He wanted to get rid of Bholi as she was ugly and not intelligent.
Q: How did Bholi’s teacher play an important role in changing the course of her life?
A: Bholi’s teacher played an important role in changing the course of her life. She was polite and friendly which touched her heart. She encouraged her every time and was affectionate towards her. The teacher transformed her into a confident person who could read, write and speak clearly. This gave her the required confidence. Moreover, teacher’s appreciation and encouragement helped her overcome her own morale.
Q: Why was Bholi frightened to go to school?
A: No girl in the family had ever gone to school. The next day, when Ramlal held her hand to take her to school, Bholi was frightened. She did not know what school was. She thought that perhaps her parents were punishing her by sending her to school. So, she cried out in terror and pulled her hand away from her father’s grip.
Q: “In time you will be more learned than anyone else in the village,” said the teacher to Bholi. What was the basis of reposting such confidence in a girl who couldn’t pronounce her name properly?
A: Bholi stammered and couldn’t even pronounce her full name to the teacher. The teacher succeeded and made her say: “Bh! Bh — Bho — Bholi.” She asked her to come to school every day. The teacher gave her a picture book and hoped that she would finish it within a month. In time, she would be more learned than anyone else in the village. Then, no one would ever be able to laugh at her.
Q: What changes did the village see after some years?
A: The years passed. The village became a small town. The primary school became a high school. There was a cinema under the tin-shed. There was a cotton-ginning mill. The mail train now stopped at their railway station.
Q: Was Ramlal happy with Bishamber’s proposal? What was the opinion of Bholi’s mother about this unequal match?
A: Ramlal was worried about Bholi. She had neither good looks nor intelligence. The proposal of Bishamber for her marriage was a pleasant surprise for him. His wife gave her acceptance to this unequal match. She felt that Bholi was lucky to have such a rich bridegroom. He had a big shop, his own house and several thousand rupees in the bank. Moreover, he was not asking for dowry.
Q: What preparations had Bishamber made on the wedding day? What was the reaction of Bholi’s parents and elder sisters regarding the celebrations?
A: The bridegroom, Bishamber, was a well-to-do grocer. He was happy and excited about the wedding day. He had come with a large party of friends and relatives with him for the wedding. A brass-band headed the procession. It was playing a popular tune of a film. Ramlal was overjoyed to see such pomp and splendor. Bholi’s elder sisters were envious of her luck.
Q: What happened when Bishamber took a quick glance at his bride’s face?
A: The auspicious moment had come. The bridegroom lifted the garland of yellow marigolds. A woman slipped back the silken veil from the bride’s face. Bishamber took a quick glance. The garland remained poised in his hand. He shouted that the bride had poxkmarks on her face. If he was to marry her, her father must give him five thousand rupees.
Q: How did Bholi react to the remarks of an old woman who called her “a shameless girl” and “a harmless dumb cow?”
A: When Bholi refused to accept a mean, greedy and cowardly man as her husband, everybody was stunned. An old woman called her “a shameless girl.” She had thought her “a harmless dumb cow.” Bholi turned violently on the old woman. She told that everybody had thought her a dumb cow and so they wanted to hand her over to such a heartless creature. She reminded that the ‘dumb cow’ had got a tongue now and she could speak out to defend herself.
Q: How did Ramlal react after the ceremony ended with the departure of the bridegroom alone?
A: Ramlal stood silently rooted to the ground. His head bowed with the weight of grief and sorrow. He turned to Bholi and asked what would happen to her now. No one would ever marry her. He asked, “What shall we do with you?”
Q: Why was Bholi reluctant to go to school with her father?
A: Bholi did not know what a school was like. She thought that her father was turning her out of his house like their old cow Lakshmi. She shouted in terror and pulled her hand away from her father’s grip.
Q: What made her feel that she was going to a better place than her home?
A: Bholi was a neglected child. But that day she was given a clean dress. She was bathed. Even oil was rubbed into her dry and matted hair. This made her feel that she was going to a better place than her home.
Q: What kind of a mother, do you think, Ramlal’s wife was?
A: Ramlal’s wife was an uncaring and callous mother. She never showed the affection to Bholi that she deserved as her child. She felt that the girl with pox-marks and lack of sense was a burden. That’s why she sent her to school so that the teachers took the trouble to handle the girl. Even when it was the matter of her marriage, the mother showed no sympathy and consented to get her married to an old and lame man.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: Give a brief sketch of Ramlal’s character.
A: Ramlal was the Numberdar of his village. He had a respectable position in the village. He had four daughters and three sons. He was a loving father. He sent his sons to the city for education. He searched for good bridegrooms for his three daughters. He was worried about his youngest daughter Bholi. He took her to’ school. He asked his wife to bathe Bholi and give her clean clothes. He did not want to marry Bholi with Bishamber who was almost of his age. He wanted to consult Bholi in this matter. But it seems that he was in wife’s influence. Even in the end, he parted with five thousand rupees for the sake of Bholi’s happiness. Thus he was a good father.
Q: Give a character sketch of Bishamber Nath.
A: Bishamber Nath was a well-to-do grocer. He had a big shop. He had a house of his own and thousands of rupees in the bank. He was a widower. He had children from his first wife. They were quite grown up now. Bishamber was an unequal match for Bholi. He was almost of the age of her father. He limped too. But Bholi’s parents thought him a good match for Bholi. He ignored his age and limping and accepted Bishamber’s proposal of marriage. Of course, Bholi was not even consulted. Bishamber Nath wanted to dazzle Bholi’s parents with his wealth. He came with a large party of friends and relatives for the wedding. A brass band moved ahead playing a popular filmy tune. Ramlal was overjoyed to see this pomp and grandeur. Bishamber Nath showed his true colour when he found that the bride had pockmarks on her face. He shamelessly demanded five thousand rupees as dowry to marry such a girl. Ramlal put even his turban at his feet. Bishamber didn’t budge and Ramlal put a bundle of notes at his feet. Bishamber was rightly punished and humiliated in the end. The ‘dumb cow’ got her tongue now. She threw away the wedding garland into the fire. She refused to many such a mean, greedy and worthless man. Bholi did the right thing by rejecting such a person.
Q: “Don’t you worry, Pitaji. In your old age I will serve you and mother”. Through this statement the narrator wants to highlight the moral values Bholi imbibed with. Based on the reading of the lesson, what made Bholi aware of her rights and how did she use them?
A: Bholi became an introvert child who lacked confidence. She was neglected and even made fun of due to her appearance and lack of intelligence. Years of education made her bold and confident. She got an aim in her life. When she refused to marry greedy Bishamber, her father became worried. She assured her father not to worry and promised that she would take care of him and her mother in their old age. She told that she would teach in the school where she learnt so much. During her education Bholi’s teacher made her aware of her rights as well as duties. She faced the challenge of rejecting greedy Bishamber with determination and confidence. Thus she protected her self-respect and integrity.
Q: School education turned Bholi from a dumb cow into a bold girl. How did she save her father from a huge expense and become his support in his old age?
A: Ironically, Bholi was sent to school as her mother believed she was a burden and let the teachers at the school worry for her. The teacher showed affection and encouraged her to shed her fear. She was assured by her teacher that she would speak like others one day. Years of hard work transformed Bholi into a bold and confident young woman. Bishamber refused to marry Bholi due to her appearance and demanded five thousand rupees. Bholi saw how her father was humiliated for no reason. She refused to marry a greedy, mean and contemptible coward. She assured her father that she would serve him and her mother in their old age. She had a mission in her life; she would spread the light of education in her village.
Q: What kind of treatment is given to Bholi by her parents? Is it justified?
A: Bholi was the youngest of the seven of Ramlal’s children. Her real name was Sulekha. When she was ten months old, she fell down from the cot on her head. Some part of her brain was damaged. So she remained a backward child. She had pock-marks on her face. She spoke with a stammer. The treatment of her parents towards her was very discouraging. They called her a witless fool. They did little to take care of her. They didn’t give her new clothes. None washed her clothes and cared for her bath. They thought her a burden on their shoulders. They sent her to school only to take off this burden from their shoulders to that of the teacher’s.
Q: “Dowry is a negation of the girl’s dignity”. Explain this statement in the light of the story of ‘Bholi’.
A: Initially Bishamber did not demand dowry to get married to Bholi. He was a widower, having children and of the age of Ramlal. But during the marriage ceremony he happened to see the face of Bholi. He bargains if he was given five thousand rupees he will marry the girl. Bholi’s father Ramlal placed his turban at his feet but he refused. A girl is considered a liability in her own natal home due to prevalence of the custom of dowry practice. Some parents are unwilling to give higher education to their daughter as they have to search for highly educated boy for marriages and a better educated boy will demand more dowry which creates unnecessary problem, for parents.  Besides, the boy who receives huge amount of dowry may think of himself as more dignified as having a higher status, greater prestige and more respectful than the girl. Subsequently the girl develops inferiority complex. Fortunately, Bholi refuses to marry greedy Bishamber and decides to serve her parents instead in their old age.
Q: Bholi’s teacher was not an ordinary teacher. She was more than that. Suppose you become a teacher. What qualities of Bholi’s teacher will you imbibe to help students to overcome social discrimination?
A: If I become a teacher, I would instil all the qualities that Bholi’s teacher has, to help students to overcome social discrimination.Bholi was sent to school because of her ugly face and lack of intelligence; she had little chance of getting a match. “Let the teachers at school worry about her,” said her mother. Her teacher worked on her as an artist. She motivated and encouraged her, and instilled in her traits of self-confidence, self-respect and courage. Education and the teacher’s efforts produced wonderful results. She stopped stammering. She hoped to be respected after completing her education. Her teacher was a caring, affectionate, kind lady who brought change in her life. She built up Bholi’s confidence and self-respect. Only because of her teacher’s instincts she could have the courage to refuse to marry a mean, greedy, lame old man.
Q: Why did Bholi at first agree to an unequal match? Why did she later reject the marriage? What does this tell us about her?
A: This is a normal practice in India that girls seldom oppose their parent’s choice of a groom. The upbringing of daughters does a kind of mental conditioning which doesn’t give them enough courage to rebel against their parent’s wishes. Bholi more or less followed the tradition of being an ideal Indian girl and agreed to an unequal match because her mother felt she was lucky to get a well-to-do groom who owned a big shop, had a house of his own and had several thousands in the bank. Moreover, he was not asking for any dowry. Bholi also heard her mother saying that he did not know about her pox-marks and her lack of sense. If the proposal was not accepted, she might remain unmarried all her life. Later on, when the groom bared his greed to everyone, it repulsed Bholi and she opposed the marriage. Unlike her sisters, Bholi is educated and has a mind of her own. She is as independent as any other modern girl in a big city. On seeing her father pleading and getting humiliated, she decided not to marry him. This tells us that she loves and respects her parents, has self-respect and knows what is right or wrong and is able to take wise decision.
Q: What values did the teacher display in transforming Bholi into a confident girl?
A: Bholi was neglected by her parents on account of her looks and lack of intelligence. She was sent to school because her mother thought her to be a burden and let the teacher at school worry about her. The teacher in the school asked her to tell her name. She stammered -and began to cry.  The teacher showed her affection and encouraged her in a friendly manner to put aside her fear. Bholi somehow told her name. The teacher assured her that she would be able £o speak like everyone else one day. Bholi was surprised. The teacher asked her to come to school regularly. Love and encouragement shown by the teacher brought out drastic changes in Bholi’s personality. Within a few years, she became so confident that she refused to marry a greedy man.

Chapter: footprints-without-feet
Q: How did Griffin become invisible?
A: Griffin swallowed a concoction of certain rare drugs that made his body transparent like glass, and also, solid as glass.
Q: Why did Griffin go inside a big London store?
A: Griffin went inside a big London store to gain some warmth, find a place for the night, and also to put on some clothes.
Q: How did he escape from the London store?
A: Griffin got up and tried to escape. The assistants ran after him. But Griffin took off his clothes one by one. He became invisible and escaped.
Q: Why did Griffin slip into a big London store?
A: Griffin slipped into a big London store because the cold was unbearable.
Q: Why were the two boys in London surprised and fascinated?
A: The two boys in London saw fresh muddy footprints appearing on the steps of a house but the barefooted man was not visible. So, they were surprised and fascinated.
Q: What was the “curious episode” that took place in the clergyman’s study?
A: One morning, the clergyman and his wife were awakened by noise. They saw no person. They were shocked to find that their money had been stolen from the desk.
Q: Who was Mr Jaffers? What was his surprise?
A: Mr Jaffers was a police constable. His surprise was that he was ordered to arrest a lawless person who was totally invisible.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: What did Griffin do in the shop of a theatrical company?
A: He wore bandages round his forehead and put on dark glasses, a false nose, big bushy side whiskers and a large hat. He attacked the shopkeeper from behind and robbed him of all his money.
Q: Why did Griffin set the landlord’s house on fire?
A: Griffin was not liked by his landlord. He decided to take revenge on him, so one day he set his house on fire. Moreover, he did not want anyone to know about his secret discovery.
Q: How did Griffin escape from the London store?
A: When two attendants of the store discovered Griffin, they chased him. Hence, in order to protect himself, he threw away his clothes and became invisible and escaped from the London store.
Q: Why did Griffin not get a suitable house to live in?
A: Griffin was a lawless person, who was largely disliked by all. When his landlord tried to evict him, he set fire to the house and escaped due to his invisibility. Thereafter, it became difficult for him to find a proper place to live in.
Q: Why were the two boys surprised when they saw the imprints of a pair of bare feet?
A: The two boys could see muddy footprints on the steps of a house in central London, descending towards the street. It was surprising to see the footprints without seeing anybody making them.
Q: The landlord’s wife was convinced that Griffin was an “eccentric scientist”. What made her think of Griffin in these terms?
A: Griffin remained indoors and did not mix up with others. His habits were strange and his appearance was fantastic. All these things of Griffin made the landlady think that he was an “eccentric scientist.
Q: Why was Mrs. Hall hysterical and fell down the stairs?
A: When Mrs. Hall went to see the invisible man in his room, she found the bedroom chair became alive, springing into the air, it charged straight into her. Then the chair pushed both husband and wife out of the room. She felt that spirits have entered into her furniture and she became hysterical.
Q: What happened when Griffin didn’t wake up in time?
A: Griffin entered a big London store. There he slept on a pile of quilts. The next morning he did not wake up in time. The shop assistants opened the door. They found Griffin sleeping.
Q: What did the scientist do when he became furious? Why were the people in the bar horrified? What happened to the constable?
A: The scientist took off his bandages and spectacles and became headless. The people in the bar were shocked to see a headless man. Griffin hit the constable Jaffers hard and made him senseless.
Q: Why were the landlord and his wife surprised to see the scientist’s door wide open?
A: The scientist always kept his room locked. He got angry if anybody tried to enter his room. So, the landlord and his wife were surprised when they found his door wide open. It was an unusual thing.
Q: What happens to the constable?
A: The policeman tried to catch Griffin. But he looked a headless man. Griffin hit the constable. Then Griffin took off his clothes and became totally invisible. The constable was hit by unseen blows. Griffin knocked him unconscious.
Q: Why were they surprised when they opened the room?
A: Both the clergyman and his wife were surprised because the room was empty. They searched everywhere but couldn’t find anyone. Yet the desk had been opened and the housekeeping money was missing.
Q: How did Griffin become a homeless wanderer without clothes?
A: Griffin was a lawless scientist. He wanted to take revenge on his landlord. He set his house on fire. Then he took some rare drugs. He became invisible. He took off his clothes and came out. Thus he became a homeless wanderer without clothes.
Q: What discovery did Griffin make?
A: Griffin was a brilliant scientist. He made some experiments to show that the human body could be made transparent. At last, he discovered a rare drug. He took this drug and his body became as transparent as a sheet of glass.
Q: What was the explanation of the mystery of the footmarks? Who was responsible for them?
A: The explanation of the mystery of the footmarks was really simple enough. Those footmarks were of a scientist. He was Griffin. Griffin carried out many experiments. He succeeded in proving that the human body could become invisible. Those were the footmarks of the invisible scientist Griffin.
Q: Why did Griffin hurry to Drury Lane, the center of the theatre world?
A: The invisible but naked Griffin decided to try the stock of a theatrical company in London. He hoped of not only finding clothes for himself but also something that would hide the empty space above his shoulder. He hurried to Drury Lane, the center of the theatre world. He made his way, invisible, upstairs. He came out a little later. He was wearing bandages around his forehead, dark glasses, a false nose, big bushy side-whiskers, and a large hat.
Q: Why did the landlady Mrs. Hall try to be friendly and prepared to excuse Griffin’s irritable habits?
A: It was winter. It was quite unusual to visit Iping in winter. So, Mrs. Hall, the landlady felt obliged to get a guest in such a season. So, she tried to be friendly with him. Griffin snubbed her and asked her not to disturb him for nothing. Mrs. Hall was prepared to excuse the strange guest because he had paid her in advance. She thought him an eccentric scientist. She tolerated the strange habits and irritable manner of the eccentric scientist.
Q: Describe the burglary committed very early in the morning at a clergyman’s house in ping.
A: A clergyman and his wife were awakened by the noises in the study. When they came downstairs, they heard the chink of money being taken from the clergyman’s desk. He flung open the door and cried, “Surrender!” They were surprised to realise that the room was empty. The desk was open and money missing. They looked under the desk, behind the curtains and even up the chimney. They found nobody anywhere. The poor couple couldn’t realise that the invisible man, Griffin, decamped unseen with the money.
Q: What and why did Griffin show himself to Mrs. Hall and why were the people in the bar horrified?
A: Mrs. Hall wanted to know how the stranger came out of an empty room and how he entered a locked room. And what he had been doing to her chair upstairs. This made Griffin furious and he cried, “Very well—I’ll show you.” Suddenly he threw off bandages, whiskers, spectacles and even nose. Mrs. Hall was shocked and the people in the bar were horrified and found themselves staring at a headless man!  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: Describe Griffin’s encounter with the village constable Jaffers. Why did nobody lay his hands on Griffin?
A: The village constable Jaffers had been informed about the wrongdoings of the stranger staying at the inn. And he appeared on the scene. He was completely surprised to find that he had to arrest a man without a head. But Jaffers was a determined person. He couldn’t be easily prevented from doing his duty. There followed a wonderful scene. The policeman tried to get hold of Griffin. As he came near, Griffin started throwing off his clothes one after another. As Griffin threw off his clothes more invisible he became. Finally, a shirt flew into the air and Griffin became absolutely invisible. The constable was trying to catch hold of a person whom he couldn’t see at all. Some people tried to help Jaffers. They were beaten back by the invisible man. In the end, Jaffers made the last attempt to hold on to the unseen scientist, Griffin. Jaffers was knocked down unconscious. The people were nervous and excited. They were crying, “Hold him!” Griffin had shaken himself free. No one knew where to lay hands on Griffin.
Q: When and how did the landlady Mrs. Hall and her husband see their furniture moving and behaving strangely in the stranger’s room? What was the result?
A: The landlord and his wife were up very early. They were surprised to see the scientist’s room widely open. Usually, it was shut and locked. They decided to investigate. They peeped round the door but found nobody. In the room, the bedclothes were cold. That proved that Griffin had woken up quite early. They found the clothes and bandages that he always wore lying about the room. All of a sudden, Mrs. Hall heard a sniff very close to her ear. A moment later the hat leaped up from the bedpost. It dashed itself into Mrs. Hall’s face. Then the bedroom chair started moving. She and her husband turned away in terror. The `extraordinary chair’ pushed both of them out of the room. Then the door was shut and locked after them. Mrs. Hall almost fell down the stairs. She was very nervous and confused. She was convinced that the room was haunted by spirits. The stranger, Griffin had caused those spirits to enter into her furniture. Her mother used to sit in the chair which rose up against her. The feeling among the neighbours was that the trouble was caused by witchcraft.
Q: Why did Griffin have to resort to a burglary at the house of a clergyman in the village of Iping?
A: Griffin had booked two rooms at the local inn in the village of Iping. The landlady Mrs. Hall tolerated the strange habits and irritable temper of her strange guest because he had paid her in advance. But the stolen money didn’t last long. Griffin had no more ready cash. He pretended to Mrs. Hall that he was expecting a cheque to arrive at any moment. Griffin had to find ready cash. So, the result was the burglary at a clergyman’s house. Very early in the morning, the clergyman and his wife were awakened by the noises in the study. When they came downstairs, they heard the chink of money being taken from the clergyman’s desk. Without making any noise, the clergyman flung open the door shouting, “Surrender!” But he was amazed to find the room empty. He and his wife looked under the desk and behind the curtains. They even looked up the chimney. There was no sign of anybody. Yet, the desk had been opened and the money was missing. The clergyman could only utter, “Extraordinary affair!” The invisible man had already decamped with the cash.
Q: Griffin misused his invention, instead of using it for the betterment of the society. Do you think moral values are important along with intellectual abilities? Discuss.
A: Griffin was a scientist who had made a discovery due to which he could be invisible. But he was rather a lawless scientist, who misused a scientific discovery for his petty, selfish gains. He set his landlord’s house on fire, when he asked him to vacate it. He entered the store invisible, stole clothes and food.  At another shop, he attacked the shopkeeper from behind and ran away after robbing his money. At Iping, he stole the clergyman’s money from his desk and hit Mrs Hall by throwing a chair on her. He hurled blows on the police constable Mr Jaffers and knocked him down. In this way, Griffin misused his scientific discovery without making benefit to the mankind.
Q: Describe the scene when Mr. Jaffers tries to arrest “a man without ahead”?
A: One day. Griffin stole money from the clergyman’s house. The people of the village suspected Griffin. They thought that he had stolen the money. Mrs. Hall called a policeman. When the policeman reached there, he was surprised. Griffin had removed his spectacles, false nose and side-whiskers. Now, he looked headless. The policeman was surprised as he had to arrest a headless man. He tried to catch Griffin. But Griffin started taking off his clothes one by one. He was becoming more and more invisible. In the end, he became totally invisible. The constable tried to fight with him. Some villagers also tried to help the policeman. But they received blows from nowhere. Then Griffin hit the policeman. He fell unconscious. Then Griffin became free and walked out.
Q: “A lawless scientist is a curse to the society.” Discuss.
A: It is true, that a lawless scientist is a curse to the society. A true scientist uses his discoveries for the good of the society and welfare of the people. It helps the nations to progress. A lawless scientist increases the miseries and sufferings of society. In this story, we find how Griffin misuses his discovery. He causes pain and suffering to others. He causes destruction. Suppose the nuclear weapons fall in the hands of a lawless scientist, he can cause widespread destruction. He may ruin the achievements of other scientists. That’s why the leaders of the world are worried about chemical weapons falling into the hands of lawless heads of governments or terrorists. If this happens, all the scientists of the world will be doomed.
Q: What was the curious episode that took place in the clergyman’s study?
A: One day, early in the morning some sounds came from the study. The clergyman and his wife were awakened. They came downstairs. They heard the chink of money from the study. It was clear that someone was taking away money from the clergyman’s desk. The clergyman took a poker in his hand. He carefully opened the door. He expected to find a thief in the room. So he shouted and asked the man to give in. But he found the room empty. They were surprised. He and his wife looked under the desk. They looked behind the curtains. They even checked the chimney. But they did not find anybody. However, the desk had been opened. They found that money was missing from the desk. This was really a curious episode.
Q: What other extraordinary things happened at the Inn?
A: The landlord and his wife were surprised to see the door of the scientist’s room open. Usually it is shut and locked and Griffin becomes furious if anyone enters his room. So they did not want to miss this opportunity. They peeped round the door, and finding nobody inside, decided to enter and investigate. The bedclothes were cold, showing that the scientist must have been up for some time now. All of a sudden Mrs. Hall heard a sniff close to her ear. A moment later that hat on the bed suddenly leapt up and dashed itself onto her face. Then the bedroom chair became alive. Springing into the air, it charged straight at her legs. As she and her husband turned away in terror, the extraordinary chair pushed them both out of the room and then appeared to slam and lock the door after them. Mrs Hall almost fell down the stairs in hysterics. She was, by now, convinced that the room was haunted by spirits and the stranger had somehow caused these to enter into the furniture.
Q: How would you assess Griffin as a scientist and a human being? What qualities or values would you suggest will make him a better person?
A: Griffin was an eccentric scientist who had discovered a rare drug which could make him invisible. Griffin became invisible not for. The welfare of the society but to satisfy his own ego and carry out satanic deeds. He was a brilliant scientist but not a law-abiding person. He was a criminal scientist who had no respect for humanity. He stole money from the clergyman’s house, set the landlord’s house on fire and even killed his father for his own benefit. He was also not a good human being. He was rude to everyone. When everyone asked about his secret, he hit them and escaped becoming invisible. I would like to suggest him to imbibe empathy, kindness, helpfulness, honesty, generosity, social responsibility, etc. These values will make him a better person. He should have used his discovery for the benefit of society and his country.

Chapter: the-book-that-saved-the-earth
Q: What did Think-Tank ask Omega to do with the book?
A: Think-Tank thought that it was a sandwich. He said that there were two slices of what was called bread with some sort of filling. He asked Omega to eat the book.
Q: Who is Think-Tank? How did Noodle address him?
A: Think-Tank is the ruler of Mars. Noodle addressed him, “O Great and Mighty Think-Tank, Ruler of Mars and her two moons, most powerful and intelligent creature in the whole universe.
Q: What did Think-Tank intend to do?
A: Think-Tank intended to invade the earth. He wanted to control the earth and put it under his rulership.
Q: Who tried to invade the earth in the twenty-first century?
A: The Martians tried to invade the earth in the twenty-first century.
Q: What guesses are made by Think-Tank about the books found on earth?
A: Think-Tank’s guess about the books found on earth is that they are some devices meant for communication.
Q: How did the children’s book transform his life?
A: The children’s book transformed his life as he had to leave his kin and evacuate the entire planet. He had to go to Alpha Centauri, a hundred million miles away to save his life.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: What is the time and place of the story at the beginning?
A: This is a science fantasy. This imaginary story is set in the twenty-fifth century. The place is the Museum of Ancient History. Department of the Twentieth Century. There is a historian sitting at a table. There is a movie projector on the table.
Q: Who was Omega? Why did he try to oat the book?
A: Omega was the captain of the space control Probe One, on Earth. Think-Tank asked him to pick up the most colourful sandwich (book) and report him about his observation on it.
Q: Why did Think-Tank send his crew on the earth?
A: Think-Tank, the ruler of Mars regarded the Earth as a mass of mud, and Earthlings as ugly, tiny-headed creatures. He planned to invade Earth and expand his domain. He sent Probe One to Earth to get more information about the Earthlings.
Q: What was Oop’s opinion about the ‘sandwiches’ he had eaten?
A: Oop was forced to eat ‘sandwiches’ and he made terrible faces while chewing. He said that it was not delicious; rather as dry as Martian dust. He remarked that he could not understand how the Earthlings could get those ‘sandwiches’ down without water.
Q: What does Think-Tank, first of all, guess about the books? Why does he order to eat them?
A: Think-Tank views a book closely. He declares that the item (book) is called a sandwich. He tells them that sandwiches are the main staple diet of the people of the Earth. There are two slices of bread and between them is some sort of filling. He asks Omega to eat a sandwich to confirm his opinion.
Q: When was the contact resumed with Mars? What did the Earthlings teach the Martians?
A: In the twenty-fifth century, they resumed contact with Mars. They became friends. Think-Tank was replaced by Noodles. They taught the Martians the difference between books and sandwiches. They established a model library on Mars.
Q: What was Noodle’s version to describe the so-called ‘sandwich’?
A: Noodle hesitantly told Think-Tank that he had ‘insignificant’ information about those ‘sandwiches’. He informed him that he had seen surveyor films of those sandwiches. He had noticed that the Earthlings did not eat them. They used them as some sort of communication devices.
Q: What happens when the Historian turns on the hysteroscopy?
A: As the Historian turn on the hysteroscope, suddenly, the scene changes from the present twenty-fifth century to many centuries ago in 2040. Spotlight on Historian goes out. Think-Tank appears. He is seated on a raised box, arms folded. He has a huge, egg-shaped head. He wears a long robe decorated with stars and circles. Apprentice Noodles stands beside him.
Q: How Does Think-Tank compare the Martians with the people on Earth? What does he call the Earth mockingly?
A: Think-Tank considers earth ‘ a ridiculous little planet’s ariel intends to put it under his generous rulership. He feels the earth is actually an unimportant place where ugly earthlings, with their tiny heads, reside. He believes the Martians to be a superior race. He mockingly calls the earth ‘Primitive ball of mud’.
Q: What different guesses were made by the Martians about what books are?
A: In the process of Martian invasion on earth, they landed in a library. They took the books as sandwiches and tried to understand the meaning of the code. And for that, they had to take vitamins given by the chemical department. They thought it would increase their intelligence.
Q: What guesses are made by Think-Tank about the books found on Earth?
A: Think Tank first of all announced that the books found on the Earth were sandwiches and to confirm it he forced Oop to eat them. Later on Noodle shared his observation and he declared that he was about to say the same thing. Now he announced that those books were a sort of communication devices.
Q: Who is shown when the projector starts?
A: The projector shows the Mas Space Control room. We see Think-Tank who is the Commander-in-Chief. He has a huge, egg-shaped head. He wears a long robe decorated with stars and circles. His deputy, Noodles stands beside him at a switchboard.
Q: How does Think-Tank describe the people on Earth? Why does he command Noodles to contact the Space probe?
A: Think-Tank thought Earthlings were weak, ignorant, uncivilized persons and hence planned to invade Earth. He sent his commander Noodles to make contact with the crew of the manned space probe, now on Earth to seek more information about the Earth.
Q: How did the book change Think-Tank’s opinion about the Earthlings?
A: Think-Tank used to believe that the Martian was a superior race to the Earthlings. But after cracking the so-called code of an old nursery rhyme book, he changed his view about the Earthlings. He now thought that the Earthlings has reached a high level of civilization and planning to invade the Mars. It made him call off his mission.
Q: What was the book about? How did Think-Tank interpret the rhymes?
A: They were reading the rhymes book named Mother Goose. When captain Omega and her team were reading and enjoying the rhymes, Think-Tank interpreted them in a different way. He concluded that he was being attacked. He at once asked his people to come back. He decided to evacuate the entire planet of Mars.
Q: How does Think-Tank compare the Earth and Earthlings, with Mars and Martians?
A: Think-Tank’s comments on the Earth and the Earthlings are very sarcastic, ridiculous and insulting. He considers Martians a handsome race. They are much more attractive than those ugly Earthlings with their tiny heads. He calls the Earth as a primitive ball of mud. He even threatens to invade it.
Q: Why was the twentieth century called the ‘Era of the Book’?
A: The twentieth century was often called the ‘Era of the book’. In those days, there were books about everything, from anteaters to Zulus. Books taught people how to, when to, where to, and why to. They illustrated, educated, punctuated, and even decorated.
Q: Why does Think-Tank declare that these sandwiches are not for ear communication but for eye communication?
A: They don’t hear any sound coming from the sandwiches. Noodles say that a cloudy piece of information is twirling around in his head. Think-Tank asks to twirl it out. Noodles clarify that the Earthlings don’t listen to the sandwiches but open and watches them. Think-Tank finds it correct and declares that those sandwiches are not for ear-communication but they are for eye communication.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: Justify the title of the play ‘The Book that Saved the Earth’.
A: A good title should reflect the theme, idea or the traits of a character. It should revolve around any of the above. The story or the play should be woven around any one of them. In the play, ‘The Book that Saved The Earth’, a book of nursery rhymes of ‘Mother Goose’ is responsible for stopping the Martian invasion of Earth. Think-Tank, the ruler of Mars plans to invade Earth before lunch and sends Probe One to get more information about the Earthlings. They enter a library but can’t figure out what items books are. They take vitamins, increase their intelligence then read the rhymes from ‘Mother Goose’. Think-Tank misinterprets the rhymes, takes them as threats to him and Mars. Scared, he calls back Probe One, drops the idea of invading and escapes with his subjects to Alpha Centauri, a hundred million miles away from Mars. Thus, the book ‘Mother Goose’ was responsible for stopping the Martian invasion of Earth. The title The Book That Saved the Earth’, reflects the theme of the play, so it is an appropriate title.
Q: Who tried to invade the earth in the twenty first century and what saved it?
A: The Martians sent a mission to invade the earth. The crew landed in a library and could not make out what the books actually were. It was believed that the books were a sort of communication device. Think-Tank asked the members to decipher the code of the ‘sandwiches’. The nursery rhymes were totally misinterpreted and it was believed that the Earthlings had developed an advance civilization and mission was called off and the Martians escaped to a remote place to save their lives. Thus the books saved the Earth.
Q: What does Historian say about the importance of books in the twentieth century? Why does he point out that particular dusty old rhymes saved the world from a Martian invasion?
A: Historian terms the twentieth century as the Era of the Book. It was the period when all kinds of books were published. There were books almost on all subjects. And each subject had many books. One could find books from anteaters to Zulus. Books taught people how to, and when to, and where to, and why. They illustrated, punctuated, and even decorated. But the strangest thing a book ever did was to save the Earth. The invasion never really happened. A single book-`Mother Goose’ saved the Earth. Just one dusty old book of nursery rhymes changed the very course of the world. It happened in 2040. The invasion of the Earth was saved because the Martian Commander-in-Chief misinterpreted the rhyme “Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.” He misinterpreted that the Earthlings wanted to capture Mars Central Control and him. He ordered the invasion fleet to evacuate the entire planet of Mars. He prepared to escape at once in a space capsule.
Q: How do the three nursery rhymes frighten Think-Tank in the play, ‘The Book That Saved the Earth’?
A: The rhyme ‘Mistress Mary, quite contrary makes Think-Tank believe that the Earthlings have discovered how to combine agriculture and mining. He thinks that they can grow explosives. The rhyme ‘Hey diddle diddle’, makes him conclude that the Earthlings have reached a high level of civilization: even their animals have musical culture and know space techniques. He fears that at that very moment, the Earthlings might be launching an interplanetary attack of millions of cows. Oop reads the rhyme. ‘Humpty Dumpty’ and shows him a picture of Humpty Dumpty. Think-Tank concludes that it is his picture and the Earthlings are planning to invade Mars.
Q: Attempt a character-sketch of Noodles highlighting the values projected by him.
A: Noodles are one of the crew members of the invasion team that came to invade earth. He is known as Apprentice Noodles. He is the co-coordinator between Think-Tank and the invasion team. He echoes Think-Tank in every manner. He is a very clever creature. He knows that Think-Tank being commander-in-chief has to be obeyed. So he keeps on praising Think-Tank and also passing sarcastic remarks. It is only Noodles who think practically and differently about the books which were considered as sandwiches to eat. But Think-Tank took over the idea as his own. But Noodles is not sad at all. He is a blind and true follower of Think-Tank.
Q: Why are books referred to as a man’s best companion? Which is your favorite book and why? Write a paragraph about that book.
A: Books are known to be as man’s best companion. They can make us mentally strong, improve our vocabulary and enhance the horizon of our knowledge. Books can be our guide and best friend. I love to read books, especially the ones that have children as their main characters and the story highlights their psychology and how innocent the children could be.  One such book in Malgudi Days written by a very renowned author R K Narayan. I love this book because the story revolves around the children. The way child’s psychology has been depicted in this book is what gives me pleasure while reading this book.
Q: Who is Think-Tank? Why has he sent a manned spacecraft to Earth?
A: Think-Tank is the Commander-in-Chief of the Mars Space Control Room. He has a huge, egg-shaped head. He wears a long robe decorated with stars and circles. His deputy, Noodles stands beside him at a switchboard. Think-Tank has already sent a manned spacecraft to the Earth. Their purpose is to collect information about the earth’s defense system and send it back to the other spacecraft from Mars who are ready to attack the earth before lunch. The incident described in the story is about the Martian invasion of 2040. In fact, the invasion never took place. A single book stopped it. It was a book of nursery rhymes. Then the historian shows the audience the happenings that actually took place. These have been recorded in a film. She turns on the projector. It shows the Mars Space Control room. We see Think-Tank who is the commander-in-chief.
Q: 'Pride has a fall’. Justify this statement giving relevant points from how Think-Tank reacted to the readings from Mother Goose.
A: Martians invaded the earth and reached in a library. Think-Tank was their boss. He was very proud of his wisdom, as he was having a big balloon-like head. He thought that he was the wisest person on Mars. Nobody could disobey him, or even dare to speak against him. He claimed that he had a quick mind. He had no respect for anyone and regarded other views as trifling. He was also fickle-minded. He misinterpreted the rhymes in a complete verbal manner. The rhyme mistress Mar made him ponder over the discovery of the earth. From the poem diddle-diddle he was more alarmed and from the poem Humpty-Dumpty, he was so frightened that he decided to leave his kingdom and run away to Alpha Centauri. Thus his great wisdom was defeated and had a great fall.
Q: Why does Think-Tank decide to run away from Mars? What does the historian say after she has narrated the incident?
A: Oop reads the nursery rhyme ‘Humpty Dumpty … again’. He shows the picture of Humpty Dumpty also. The picture resembles Think-Tank. He is scared. He says that the Earthlings have seen him. They are planning to capture Mars Central Control and him. He decides to run away from Mars. He orders Noodles to prepare a space capsule for him. He must escape without delay. Noodles ask Think-Tank where they shall go. Think-Tank replies they will go to the planet Alpha-Centauri, a hundred million miles away. After narrating the incident to his audience, the historian says that one old book of nursery rhymes saved the earth from a Martian invasion. Then in the twenty-fifth century, they resumed contact with Mars. They became friends. They taught the Martians the difference between books and sandwiches. They established a model library on Mars.

Chapter: the-hack-driver
Q: What did the hack driver tell the narrator about Lutkins’ mother?
A: The hack driver told the narrator that Lutkins’ mother was a real terror. She was nine feet tall, four feet thick and as quick as a cat.
Q: Why was he sent back to New Mullion? Who went with him?
A: The lawyer was sent back to New Mullion to serve summons on Lutkins. He had failed in his mission earlier. This time another man who had worked with Lutkins was also sent with him.
Q: Does the narrator serve the summons that day?
A: No, the narrator does not serve the summon that day.
Q: Who is Lutkins?
A: The hack driver, who called himself Bill, is Oliver Lutkins.
Q: How did Bill paint a picture of people in words?
A: The Bill, the hack driver was very talkative. He won his confidence. He drove him to various places telling that the villagers would help him in finding Lutkins.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: What did the hack driver tell the narrator about Lutkin’s mother?
A: He said that she was nine feet tall and four feet thick as a cat and could talk sharp. She was a real terror. Once, she almost took off his skin because he did not treat the box she had given to him to carry as delicately as a box of eggs.
Q: What job did the narrator get after graduation? Did he like his work?
A: After doing his graduation, the narrator got the job of a junior assistant clerk in a law firm. No, he did not like his work. He had to serve a summons on the wanted people. He had to visit many dirty places. He never liked his work.
Q: Why did the lawyer rejoice at his new assignment?
A: Working in the dirty and shadowy parts of the city was becoming more dangerous and difficult for the lawyer. He was overjoyed when his law firm sent him out forty miles out in the country to a town called New Mullion. He was to serve a summons on a man called Oliver Lutkins. They needed this man as a witness in a legal case. The idea of visiting a country town with cleaner surroundings was quite a welcome and romantic diversion for him.
Q: Why was he happy to go to New Mullion? Why did he go there?
A: The narrator did not like the dirty and dark sides of the city life. He thought that he would find some pleasant sights in New Mullion. So, he was happy to go there.He went there to serve summons on Oliver Lutkins.
Q: Why did the young lawyer wish to return to New Mullion?
A: Although the young lawyer failed to serve summons to Lutkins, he was so much impressed with the warmth and helpful nature of the country people that he felt excited. He planned to practice at New Mullion and leave his job.
Q: How did the hack driver sketch the character of Lutkins?
A: In fact, the hack driver was Lutkins himself. He sketched Lutkins as a very clever man who was goodat deceiving people. He never repaid the money he had taken from others. He had a passion for Poker.
Q: ‘But he was no more dishonest than I’. Elaborate the statement with reference to ‘The Hack Driver’.
A: The lawyer charged a handsome amount from his firm to visit new mullion. He was given some amount to expend in the process of searching Lutkins. But he paid very little money to the hack driver. Bill already knew that the lawyer was searching for him, still, he made him wander here and there, and even charged him two dollars an hour for six hours, including one hour of his lunchtime. This made the lawyer utter these words.
Q: The narrator and the hack driver drove around together to find Lutkins.(i) Which were the places they visited?(ii) Why couldn’t they find Lutkins?
A: (i) The hack driver took the narrator to almost all the places where Lutkins could be found. They visited Fritz’s shop, GustafFs shop, Gray’s stop, the pool room and Lutkins mother’s farmhouse. (ii) They could not find Lutkins because the Hack driver was Lutkins himself.
Q: Why do you think Bill offered to help the narrator find Lutkins?
A: Bill himself was Lutkins. He knew that the lawyer is searching for him. He wanted to play a prank on him and offered to help him find Lutkins. Even he made some money in this process and made him wander here and there. He and his mother made a fool of the narrator and had great laughter.
Q: How did Lutkins’ mother receive the narrator?
A: Lutkins’ mother was not ready to tell them anything about Lutkins’. She tried to avoid their enquiry. When she ceune to know about the purposes of the narrator, she got furious. She went to the kitchen and came out with an iron rod. She marched towards them with a threat. They had to retreat from there.
Q: Why did the narrator feel that Bill had already made it his own task to find Oliver Lutkins for him?
A: The narrator found Bill very open and friendly. He glowed with the warmth of his affection. Bill wanted the business but his kindness was real. He offered his carriage for two dollars an hour. The narrator was happy to pay to such a good fellow. Bill assured the narrator that he knew about all the places where Lutkins usually could be found out. The narrator began to feel that Bill had made it his own task to find Oliver Lutkins for him.
Q: How did the people at the law firm receive him?
A: The narrator could not find Lutkins. He could not serve the Summons on him so everyone at the firm was angry with him. They scolded and disgraced him. His chief considered him as a useless fool. He was asked to go back to serve the summons on Lutkins.
Q: What information did the narrator get after visiting Gustaf? Gray’s barbershops and other places in New Mullion?
A: They drove to Gustaf’s barbershop. Again Bill entered first. The lawyer remained at the door. Gustaff replied angrily that he hadn’t seen him. If they found him, they could collect the money he owed him. Then, Bill took him to Gray’s shop. Perhaps, Lutkins had gone there for a shave. They were told that they missed Lutkins by only five minutes. They got the same answer at the pool room and elsewhere in the town.
Q: How did the hack driver come to know why the lawyer was hunting for Lutkins?
A: The hack driver told the lawyer that if he tried to collect money from him in those fancy clothes, he would be suspicious and run away. The lawyer took him into his confidence and told him that he wanted to serve the summons on Lutkins.
Q: How did the lawyer find the streets and shops of New Mullion?
A: The lawyer found the streets of New Mullion muddy. With rows of wooden shops, either painted in sour brown or not painted at all. He was disappointed because he expected to see a sweet and simple country village.
Q: Describe the narrator’s encounter with Lutkins’ terrible mother. Why was he asked to move out immediately by Bill?
A: Bill drove the narrator into a poor farmyard. There they were faced by a huge and cheerful old woman. Bill bravely went up to her and asked about her son, Oliver Lutkins. She shouted that she didn’t know anything about him. Bill told her that they had a legal right to search the house. This made her famous. She went inside and came out with an iron rod from the hearth. She threatened to burn them alive if they dared to do such a thing. Bill asked the narrator to go out at once before she could murder them.
Q: Did Lutkin’s mother allow the lawyer to search her house to find Lutkins?
A: The hack driver told Lutkins’ mother that the lawyer represented the court in the city and he had a legal right to search the home. She treated them quite disrespectfully but allowed to search the house. But they could not find Lutkin’s there.
Q: Describe the feelings of the young lawyer when he came to know the reality of the hack driver at last.
A: As long as the lawyer did not know that the hack driver was Lutkins himself, he enjoyed the hack driver’s company and glowed in the warmth of his affection. But as the identity of the hack driver was revealed, the lawyer felt very quite hurt. This was especially when Lutkins and his mother laughed at the lawyer as though the rye was a boy when he served the summons. Later, however, he acknowledged their loving kindness too.
Q: What more does Bill say about Lutkins and his family?
A: Bill told the lawyer that he knew Lutkin’s mother. He said that she was a terror. He narrated an incident when he took a trunk to her once and she almost took his skin off because he did not treat it like a box of eggs. He also said that she was very tall and fat. She was very quick and could talk a lot. He said that Oliver must have heard that somebody was chasing him and consequently, would have gone into hiding at his mother’s place.
Q: How did the narrator’s boss react to his failure in tracing Oliver Lutkins?
A: The narrator couldn’t trace Oliver Lutkins in New Mullion. The people in the company were upset. The case was coming up in court. The narrator felt himself a ‘shameful, useless fool.’ He felt his promising legal career coming to an end before it had begun. The chief almost ‘murdered’ him. He hinted that he might do well at digging trenches. He was ordered back to New Mullion with a man who had worked with Oliver Lutkins.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: Bill or Oliver Lutkins was a complete contrast to the narrator. How did a seasoned crook like Lutkins outwit the gullible lawyer proving him a novice and just a bright boy of seven?
A: Certainly, both the main characters of the story are totally different. Bill or Lutkins maneuvers and plots under the garb of friendliness. The narrator is outwitted and deceived due to his gullibility. Bill (Lutkins) knows how to confuse and misdirect the narrator’s search for Oliver Lutkins. He befriends the lawyer convincing him that he is the only person in New Mullion who can help him in finding out Oliver Lutkins. He overpowers the narrator’s capacity for reasoning and thinking. The narrator becomes a soft target of cunning Lutkins. He allows giving Lutkins all the space and time that he needed to plan out and scheme things. The narrator became just a willing puppet in Bill’s hands. Actually, he danced to his tunes. Bill’s pretensions clouded the narrator’s wisdom and sense of discretion. Bill (Lutkins) was not a crook and fraud but an honest man full of human values for him. The cunning Lutkins had the last laugh. When the narrator served summons, Lutkins and his mother laughed as if he were a seven-year-old boy.
Q: Do you think the lawyer was gullible? How could he have avoided being taken for a ride?
A: The lawyer seems to be a simpleton and inexperienced person. He has yet to come to terms with the way the people in this world function. Being a lawyer, he could have easily avoided being duped by a stranger. Before visiting that village, he could have gathered important information regarding Lutkins. He could have taken a photograph of Lutkins along with him, most importantly, he should not have discussed his purpose of his visit with a total stranger, as it was a matter that involved law and security.
Q: In life, people who easily trust others are sometimes made to look foolish. One should not be too trusting. Describe how Oliver Lutkins made a fool of the young lawyer.
A: Appearances are not always true. At times a person on first meeting appears to be friendly, co-operative, understanding but as the time unfolds a different story is revealed. When the lawyer comes to the city for first time he is very happy to meet the hack driver. In fact the hack driver himself is Oliver Lutkins. The hack driver seemed to be a simple country man ready to help. The hack driver showed affectionate behaviour. He left a favourable impression on the narrator’s mind. But very soon lawyer was able to realize that hack driver himself was Oliver Lutkins. It te so foolish to find that a wise person like a lawyer is befooled by a simple country man.
Q: Describe the young lawyer’s first encounter with the hack driver.
A: The narrator was a junior assistant clerk in a law firm in the city. Once he was sent to New Mullion to serve summons to a person named Oliver Lutkins. He reached New Mullion by train. At the station, he met a hack driver. He seemed to be helpful and friendly. The narrator told him that he wanted to see Lutkins very urgently. The hack driver was Lutkins himself. He told the narrator that he knew all the places very well where Lutkins could be found. The narrator hired him at the rate of two dollars per hour. The hack driver drove the narrator for six hours in New Mullion in search of Lutkins. He kept the narrator behind him. He was so cunning that he tutored the people about his plan. Everybody said that Lutkins was there a little while ago and had just gone away. The narrator had to return back to the city without finding Lutkins.
Q: Which were the places the narrator and the hack driver visited to search for Lutkins? How did they miss him narrowly everywhere?
A: The narrator was a young lawyer and”was sent to New Mullion to serve a summon on Lutkins. The narrator did not recognise him. He met Bill, the hack driver at the station, who promised him to help in finding Lutkins. The hack driver first of all took him to Fritz. They learnt from him that he had gone to Gustaff s barber shop to have a shave. Reaching there, they learnt that Oliver had left for Gray’s barber shop. They missed him just by five minutes. The hack drove him to the poolroom. They missed him there too. After lunch the hack driver took the narrator to the farm of Lutkin’s mother. Lutkins could not be found there too. Thus, they missed him narrowly everywhere.
Q: Give a brief character sketch of Oliver Lutkins.
A: Oliver Lutkins was a jolly natured and fun loving person. He had a pleasant appearance. He impressed the lawyer at the railway station by his friendliness and simplicity. But he was not so simple and honest as he appeared to be. He knew about the lawyer’s ignorance and his purpose. He decided to be fool him. He introduced himself as Bill. He had a lot of fun out of his ignorance. But Oliver had no other intention to befool the narrator besides having simple fun and enjoyment. He had a good understanding with the town folks who helped him in his plan. He loved poker. Lutkins never harmed anybody. He was very kind and well mannered too. He was a talented actor who made fun of an intelligent lawyer. He was very clever and sinart to plan at the moment and include everyone in his plan right before the narrator’s eyes.
Q: What did the hack driver tell the narrator about Lutkins’ mother?
A: The hack driver told the narrator that Lutkins’ mother was a terror. He told him that she was about nine feet tall and four feet thick. He told him that once he had taken a trunk for her at her farmhouse. She almost had taken his skin off because he had not treated the trunk like a box of eggs. He said to him that she was as quick as a cat. If she had heard from anywhere that someone had been looking for her son, she would have been more dangerous. He made the narrator more frightened to tell that facing such a dangerous lady would be very risky.
Q: Intelligence or cleverness cannot be identified only on the basis of our work or profession but it comes from our inside. Explain it with reference to the chapter, ‘The Hack Driver’.
A: Yes, it is quite right that intelligence and cleverness come automatically from our inside because it is our birth quality, it cannot be created, that’s why our intelligence or cleverness cannot be identified only on the basis of our work or profession. Many times in our daily life, we can find such examples. For example, a policeman is always considered brave and fighter because he has to face many difficulties daily and if he is not like that, he cannot defeat criminals, dacoits, burglars and cheaters. But sometimes we find some policemen opposite to it. Some policemen nm away from the place where the people need them very much. Such policemen never think about their duty. They think only to save their lives. Such examples can easily be found in many different fields like medical, political. Some doctors don’t fulfill expectation of the common people, they think only for their families. So it is clear that our work or profession cannot disclose our internal quality like intelligence or cleverness. As we find in this story, the lawyer is not so clever or intelligent but the hackman is very cunning.
Q: Why do you think the lawyer was happy to take summons to New Mullion? How did the lawyer develop a perception of Lutkinns? If you would have been in the lawyer’s place, what would have been your reaction towards Bill’s statements?
A: The narrator was happy to go to New Mullion. He thought it must be a beautiful and calm village. He considered Lutkins a friendly fellow. He liked his openness, warmth and affection. He took his kindness to be real. He was impressed by his ever of help although the hack driver was doing his business and earning handsome money from the lawyer.  If I had been in the lawyer’s place I never considered Bill’s statement true. I would have counter checked his statement by talking to other persons of the village. I would not have spent the whole day with a single person in search of Lutkins, but rather consulted different people to find Lutkins.

Chapter: the-making-of-a-scientist
Q: What happened with Ebright when he entered a county science fair for the first time?
A: He entered a county science fair Ebright for the first time. His entries were slides of frog tissues. But he did not win any prize.
Q: What lesson does Ebright learn when he does not win anything at a science fair?
A: Ebright realizes that were display of his collection does not mean science. To win at a science fair he will have to do real experiments and prove his worth.
Q: Mention any two Ebright contributions to the world of science.
A: Ebright made valuable contributions to the world of science. He discovered an unknown insect hormone and also determined how the cell could read the blueprint of its DNA.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: Who were the important people in Albright’s life? Why
A: Ebright’s mother who encouraged him as a child and Dr. Frederick A. Urquhart O. had inspired him to study about butterflies were quite important in Albright’s life, Also, Ridded A Weathered, Albright’s Social Studies teacher opened Albright’s mind to new ideas and praised him for his handwork and indomitable spirit.
Q: Why did Richard Ebright give up tagging butterflies?
A: Richard Ebright lost interest in tagging butterflies as it was tedious and there was not much feedback. He could recapture only two butterflies in all the time he did it and they were not more than seventy five miles away from where he lived.
Q: Why did viceroy butterflies copy monarchs?
A: Viceroy butterflies copied monarchs because monarchs do not taste good to birds. Viceroy butterflies on the other hand taste good to birds. So, the more they look similar to monarchs, the less likely they are to become a bird’s prey. Thus they protect themselves.
Q: What all hobbies did Albright develop in kindergarten?
A: As a child, Ebright had a driving curiosity. He was interested in learning new things. He was a good in studies and earned top grades in the class. He also collected rocks, fossils and coins. He became an eager astronomer too.
Q: What did Ebright realize when he started tagging butterflies?
A: Ebright started tagging monarch butterflies. He realized that chasing the butterflies one by one won’t enable him to each many. So he decided to raise a flock of butterflies.
Q: How did Richard Ebright excite the scientific world at the age of twenty-two?
A: Richard Ebright was just twenty-two when he ‘excited’ the scientific world with a new theory. It was on how cells worked. Ebright and his college room-mate explained the theory in an article in the ‘Proceedings of the National Academy of Science’. It was the first time that this famous scientific journal had ever published the work of college students.
Q: What other interests besides science did Richard Ebright pursue?
A: Richard Ebright was a champion debater and public speaker. He was a good canoeist and all-around outdoor person. He was also an expert photographer, particularly of natural and scientific exhibits.
Q: Why did Richard Ebright start a project of tagging the butterflies?
A: Once Ebright’s mother bought him a book .’The Travels of Monarch X’. At the end of the hook, the writer Dr. A. Urquhart had invited readers to help him in the study of butterfly migration by tagging them. So he started tagging the butterflies.
Q: What lesson did Ebright learn when he did not win anything at the science fair?
A: When Ebright did not win anything at the science fair, he learnt a lesson that he needed to do real experiments, not simply make a neat display. His entry was slides of frog tissues which he showed under a microscope.
Q: Which project did Albright submit in his eighth grade? Why did he win?
A: For his eighth grade project, he tried to find the cause of a viral disease that killed all monarch caterpillars every few years. He thought it all happened because of a hectic and tried raising caterpillars in the presence of beetles but he did not get any results, but he went ahead and showed his experiments and trials arid won a prize.
Q: How can Albright’s theory of cell life be a revolution in the medical field if it is proved correct.
A: Ebright identified the chemical structure of the gold spot hormone and found so cells can read the blueprint of its DNA. To further test his theory, he began doing experiments’ if it proves correct it will be a big step towards understanding the process of life. It might lead to new ideas for preventing some types of cancer and diseases.
Q: What did Ebright realize when he did not win any prize in the county science fair?
A: He realised that the winners had tried to do real experiments. So he decided to do further research in his favorite field, that is, insects on which he had already been doing work.
Q: Why did Richard Ebright admire his teacher Richard A Weiherer?
A: Richard Ebright had great respect and admiration for his Social Studies teacher. He was Richard’s adviser to the Debating and Model United Nations Clubs. Richard A Weiherer was the perfect person for Ebright who opened his mind to new ideas.
Q: What experiments and projects does he then undertake?
A: He then undertakes the projects and experiments to find out what actually causes the viral disease that kills nearly all Monarch caterpillars. He then works on a project to test the theory that viceroy butterflies copy monarchs to survive.
Q: What did Ebright discover about the spots on a monarch butterfly’s pupa?
A: Ebright tried to find out what was the purpose of the twelve tiny gold spots on a monarch butterfly’s pupa. To find the answer Ebright and another student built a device that showed that the spots were producing a hormone. It was necessary for the butterfly’s full development.
Q: How did Ebright’s basement become home to thousands of monarch butterflies?
A: Richard Ebright used to send tagged monarch butterflies to Dr. Urquhart for his research work. Chasing butterflies one by one was difficult and he couldn’t catch many. So, he decided to raise some of the butterflies in his basement. He would catch a monarch butterfly, take her eggs and raise them. Then, he would tag the butterflies’ wings and let them go. So, his basement became home to thousands of monarch butterflies.
Q: Who was Dr. Frederick A Urquhart? Why did Richard Ebright look to him for fresh ideas?
A: Dr. Frederick A Urquhart was a scientist and teacher at the University of Toronto, Canada. He was doing research on butterfly migrations. Ebright sent him many tagged butterflies for his research work. Richard Ebright looked to him for fresh ideas and suggestions. Dr. Urquhart sent many suggestions for experiments which helped Richard Ebright in winning many prizes in County and International Science Fairs.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: To participate in the competition is more necessary than to win a prize. Explain this statement in the light of Ebright’s participation at the country science fair.
A: We know very well to win is a human nature. Everyone wants to get a winning place everywhere. Our life is full of different competitions at different levels. In these, competitions everyone of us wants to become a winner. But it is always not possible. When we enter any competition, we feel a great zeal. We try our best to get the top position there. But if we don’t get or achieve our goal, we feel disappointed. Great thinkers have said that participation is more important than winning. The same is proved in Ebright success. Richards Ebright participated in the country science fair, but he lost. There he showed slides of frog tissues. He realised that he should have done some real experiments to be a winner. If he did not participate in that competition, the result might have been different.
Q: Describe Richard Ebright’s various achievements in science, particularly his great work on the monarch butterflies. Who did Ebright look to for getting fresh ideas and suggestions?
A: Richard Ebright had all the necessary ingredients that are required in the making of a scientist. He had a first-rate mind, was competitive and had the will to win. Above all, he was a great collector and never lost his scientific curiosity. His scientific journey started very early. While he was still in the second grade, he had collected all the species of butterflies found around his hometown.The Travels of Monarch Xwas the book that changed his life. It opened the world of science to the eager collector. His failure at his first county science fair taught him an important lesson. He learned that winners do real experiments. One of the most important projects of Richard Ebright was to prove that viceroy butterflies try to look like monarch butterflies. They do so to avoid being eaten by birds. Ebright also proved that twelve tiny gold spots on a monarch pupa produced a hormone that was necessary for the butterfly’s full development. His other project won first place for zoology at the International Fair. It showed that if cells are fed the hormone from the gold spots, they can develop into normal butterfly wing scales. The crowning achievement of Ebright’s brilliant scientific career was his work on the chemical structure of a hormone. He proved that a cell can read the blueprint of its DNA and thus DNA controls heredity and is the blueprint for life.3 Richard Ebright looked to Dr. Urquhat for fresh ideas and suggestions. The book, The Travels of Monarch X, opened the world of science to him. He sent tagged butterflies to Dr. Urquhart for his research works. Dr. Urquhart’s new ideas and suggestions helped Ebright to achieve prizes and honors in the county and International Science Fairs.
Q: Which book did Ebright mother get for him? How did it change his life?
A: Ebright’s mother got a children’s book called The Travel of Monarch X’ for him. The book invited readers to help study butterfly migrations and actively participate in tagging butterflies to help in the research being conducted by Dr Frederick A. Urquhart. Ebright then went on to raise an entire flock of butterflies in the basement of his home. In this way the book managed to keep his enthusiasm in the study of butterflies alive for several years and opened the world of science to the young collector who never lost his scientific curiosity.
Q: Besides curiosity a number of other values are required to become a successful scientist. Explain with reference to the chapter, ‘The Making of a Scientist’.
A: From very young age Richard Ebright was competitive and put in extra effort with curiosity for the right reason to win. But his mother was always very dedicated and made his spirits rise high. He did not lose heart even after losing when he was in seventh grade. To him people around were very encouraging. His mother’s encouragement was really an eye-opener. She took him on trips, bought him telescopes, microscopes, cameras, mounting materials and other equipment. Thus constant support of each other opened a new world. This helps us to conclude that hard work, parental guidance and keen observation are the qualities which help one to excel.
Q: ‘Success is failure turned inside out’. Prove the above statement with instances from the journey taken by Richard Ebright from losing at the science fair to winning at the international fair.
A: Success is the fruit of failure. It never comes straight but through failure. This can be seen in the life of Richard Ebright. Although he earned top grades in school, on everyday things he was just like every other kid. He faced many failures in his life but every failure strengthened his will to succeed. When he was in seventh grade he participated in County Science Fair with his slides of frog tissues. But he could not win a prize. This made him determined to win the prize and in his eighth grade, he again participated in the science fair with the experiment of viral disease in monarch caterpillars and won the prize. The very next year he participated with his experiment of whether viceroy butterflies copy the monarch butterflies in order to save their life from the birds and this project won Ebright, third prize in the overall county science fair. His experiment regarding gold spots of monarch liar which he built a device that showed. That the spots produced hormones necessary for the full development of butterflies won third prize in international science and engineering fair.Next year his advanced experiments on the monarch pupa won him first place at the international science fair. Thus, for Richard Ebright, we can say that success is failure turned inside out.
Q: How did Ebright discover an unknown insect hormone?
A: In his second year in high school, Ebright’s research led to his discovery of an unknown insect hormone. Indirectly, it led to his new theory on the life of cells. He tried to answer a very simple question. What is the purpose of the twelve tiny gold spots on a monarch pupa? To prove Ebright and one other student-built a device that showed that the spots were producing a hormone. It was necessary for the butterfly’s full development. This project won Ebright first place in the county fair and entry into the International Science and Engineering Fair. There he won third place for zoology.

Chapter: the-midnight-visitor
Q: Who was in Ausable’s room? What was in his hand?
A: A man named Max was there in Ausable’s room. He was another secret agent. He had an automatic pistol in his hand.
Q: Who is Fowler and what is his first authentic thrill of the day?
A: Fowler is a writer. His authentic thrill of the day is finding a man with pistol in Ausable’s locked room.
Q: How has Max got in?
A: Max has a pass key. He has got in through the main door.
Q: How does Ausable say he got in?
A: Ausable says that he got in through the balcony of the room.
Q: Why and how did Max enter Ausable’s room?
A: Max wanted those important papers from Ausable so he entered his room secretly from the main door. He had managed to get the pass key to open the door.
Q: How did Max get in?
A: Max got into the room with a passkey or a master key.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: How did Ausable behave to see Max in his room?
A: To see Max in his room Ausable remained cool and silent. He was not afraid of Max. He seemed to be angry with the management of the hotel regarding the balcony below the window of his room.
Q: Why was Ausable confident that Max would never return?
A: Believing Ausable’s story about the balcony to be true, Max stepped out, however, had concocted a very convincing story, and knew that what awaited hit was a drop from the sixth floor. Hence, he was confident that Max would never return.
Q: How did Ausable kill Max without using a weapon?
A: Ausable was an intelligent spy. When he found Max waiting for him in his room, he made a story of a balcony under his window. He convinced Max about the balcony. And thus, when someone knocked at the door, Max fearing it to be the police, jumped out of the window and died.
Q: How is Ausable different from other Secret Agents?
A: Ausable was very fat. He looked very slow. He had an American accent. He had no pistol or any other arms. So, he was different from the others.
Q: Why did Fowler come to meet Ausable? Was he able to achieve his target?
A: Fowler was a young and romantic writer. He had come to see Ausable know about the life of a secret agent. Fowler was fascinated n by them and thought of them as mysterious and romantic. He was not able to achieve his target as Ausable was a boring man.
Q: Describe Ausable.
A: Ausable was a secret agent. He was a fat and sloppy fellow. He was not a romantic figure. He had Wine to Paris from Boston twenty years ago. He could speak French and German passably. He had a style of his own in the American language.
Q: How did Max react when Ausable told him that the loud knockings at the door of the police?
A: Ausable cooked up the police’s story. He told that he himself had sought the protection of the police. The knockings at the door signaled their arrival. Max’s face was black with anger. Max swung a leg over the windowsill and shouted to send the police away. He threatened him to obey. If not, he would take his chances and shoot.
Q: Why did Fowler want to meet Ausable? Why was he disappointed?
A: Fowler was a young romantic writer. He had a fine imagination about spying and secret agents. He loved adventure and thrill. So he wanted to meet Ausable who was engaged in collecting sensitive information. He was disappointed after spending a dull evening in a French music hall with a fat, sloppy man as there was nothing mysterious or romantic about him.
Q: Why did Fowler feel let down when he met Ausable?
A: Fowler felt let down and disappointed to meet Ausable. He had a different picture of a secret agent in his mind. He thought they should look to be very mysterious and romantic but he found Ausable a very fat and boring man.
Q: Ausable did not fit any description of a secret agent. Comment.
A: Ausable did not fit any description of a secret agent. He did not seem to be so smart, active, movable, aggressive an romantic as we read in books or see in films. He was very fat and sloppy. The crack of pistols, wine and dark-eyed beauties are normally associated with secret agents like James Bond. These qualities had nothing to do with Ausable.
Q: Describe Max as a secret agent.
A: Max was a secret agent and a rival and enemy of Ausable. He was slender, a little less than tall. He appeared crafty and had pointed countenance of a fox. There was nothing especially menacing about him except his pistol. He came to Ausable’s room to steal a very important paper concerning some new missiles. He is outwitted by Ausable and made to jump out of his window.
Q: Who actually had knocked at the door of Ausable’s room? Why did he come there?
A: Henry, the waiter was knocking at the door in hotel. Infact, Ausable had ordered for a bottle of wine and two glasses. When there was a knock at the door he reached as if policeman was at the door. He had come there as Ausable had ordered drinks before coming into the room.
Q: What made the story of the balcony so convincing?
A: Ausable showed his annoyance for the nuisance created by the balcony. He said that this was the second time that someone had got into his room through it. He also said that the balcony was not his but belongs to the next apartment and earlier his room used to be a part of a large unit.
Q: What position did Max take before he jumped out of the window?
A: Max kept his body twisted. In this way, he could keep his gun pointed at Ausable and Fowler. He grasped the frame with his free hand to support himself. He swung his other leg up and over the windowsill. The moment he heard the knocking getting louder at the door, he positioned himself to jump out of the window.
Q: What story did Ausable frame about calling the police?
A: As soon as there was a knock at the door, Max enquired of it. Ausable told him that he had already informed the police to check if everything was okay at intervals because of the important papers. Ausable told Max that they were on their duty to check.
Q: Did Ausable know that it was the waiter who had knocked at the door?
A: Yes, Ausable knew that the man knocking at the door was the waiter. He had ordered him to bring a bottle of wine. And he knew that the waiter must have come with the drinks.
Q: Who is Fowler and what is his first authentic thrill of the day?
A: Fowler is a writer and he had come to meet Ausable. Fowler’s first authentic thrill of the day came when he saw a man in Ausable’s room pointing a pistol towards Ausable and himself.
Q: What is the important paper that Ausable talks of?
A: Ausable is a secret agent. He has been assigned an important job. He has an important paper regarding some new missiles under his custody. The paper may well affect the course of history. It is of so much importance that several men and women have risked their lives to get them. Even Max, a secret agent himself, comes to grab them from Ausable’s room.
Q: How did Max go out of Ausable’s room to save himself from the police?
A: Max was very nervous to find the police at the door. He went out of the window saying that he would wait in the balcony. He warned Ausable to send them away or he would shoot him. Max did not confirm the balcony and stepped out of the window and died.
Q: How does Ausable say he got in?
A: Ausable says that he thought Max had got into the room through the balcony. He said that it was the second time in a month that somebody had got into his room this way.
Q: Did Fowler find this episode, thrilling or disappointing? Give reasons for your answer.
A: :Fowler found this episode very thrilling. He was much surprised by the tactful nature of Ausable. He cocked-up a story about the balcony and the police. He got the intruder, Max, killed without firing a shot.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: At the beginning of the story, Fowler felt disappointed with Ausable. Do you think Fowler had the same feeling towards the end of the story? Give reasons for your answer.
A: At the beginning of the story, Fowler felt disappointed with Ausable because he did not at all look like a secret agent of his imagination. He found him quite boring. He did not want to be with him anymore. But when he found Max in his room with a gun, he was thrilled. He found that Ausable was not at all perturbed. He cocked-up a story about the balcony outside his window. When the waiter knocked at the door, Ausable told Max that it would be the police. He told him that he had called the police for the security of that important paper. Hearing this Max jumped outside the window to the balcony. But there was no balcony. He fell down from the sixth floor and died. Thus, Fowler was thrilled to see all this. So towards the end of the story, he was not disappointed with Ausable.
Q: Sometimes, appearances can be very deceptive. How does this statement prove with this story?Answer
A: Yes, it is true that sometimes we fail to identify the real personality of a man due to his different appearances. So, it can be said that appearances can be deceptive. Fowler was young and romantic. He was a writer of adventurous stories. Ausable was a secret agent—a detective. He faces danger in his work. So, Fowler wanted to meet him for some adventurous stories. But when he met Ausable in a French hotel with a damp corridor, Fowler felt disappointed. But Ausable proved himself after reaching his room. A man named Max was found inside Ausable’s room with a gun in his hand. Ausable at once proved that he possessed the quality of a true detective. He told Max about a balcony next to the window, and police at the door. Max believed him because Ausable’s way of talking was so real.
Q: “Presence of mind and intelligence are more powerful than gun”. How far is it true in case of Ausable, the secret agent?
A: Ausable did not at all have the conventional image of a secret agent. He was short and very fat. However Ausable had a very sharp and active mind. When he entered his hotel room with Fowler he found Max with a gun in his room. Max was an agent of another organisation. Ausable, with presence of mind, invented a story of non-existent balcony. Max was convinced about existence of balcony and this led to r his tragic end. Ausable did not use physical strength but only his presence of mind.
Q: Though Max was very cunning, he was still but a little spy before Ausable. Explain.
A: Though Max was very cunning, he was indeed no match to Ausable. He was easily misled by Ausable into believing that there was a balcony attached to the room. He also made him fool by cooking up a false story about the police knocking at the door though he knew that it was the waiter. Ausable’s facial expressions were so normal that Max could not believe he was telling lies to him. Ausable was able to get rid of Max with very little efforts. So we can say that Max was “a little spy” before Ausable.
Q: What was Ausable’s problem? How did he solve it?
A: Ausable was a secret agent in an organisation. He had gone out with Fowler to spend the evening in a French music hall. When they returned to Ausable’s room in the hotel, they found Max standing in the middle of the room. He had a revolver in his hand. Ausable did not lose his calm. With unique presence of mind, he fabricated a story. He said that it was the second time someone had entered his room through the balcony under the window. Max took the concocted story as true.
Q: How did Ausable use ‘the knock at the door in his favor? What light does it throw on his character?
A: Ausable was a secret agent. He was staying in a hotel. A guest named Fowler comes to meet him. Ausable gives an order to the waiter for a bottle of wine and two glasses. When they entered the room, they were surprised to see an intruder named Max in the room. That man had a pistol in his hand. After some time there was a knock at the door. Ausable knew that it was the waiter but he told Max that it would be the police. He said that he himself had called the police for the protection of the important report. Hearing this Max jumped out of the window on to the balcony. There was no balcony. He fell down and died. This episode shows that Ausable had great presence of mind. He was a clever spy indeed.
Q: What impression do you form of Ausable as a secret agent after reading the story “The Mid night Visitor”?
A: Ausable was a determined secret agent. He was dedicated to his work. He was agile in action even though he was a sloppy fat man. He was sane and shrewd. Being calm and cool headed by nature he did not lose his presence of mind when he found Max in his room with a revolver. It was midnight. He cooked up a false story of a balcony existing under the window just to befool the intruder.  Instantly they heard a knock at the door. Ausable remarked that the police had come to check on him and to provide him security. Getting nervous, Max rushed towards the window. He dropped to the balcony and fell down dead. He was patient, fearless, courageous, ready-witted and resourceful.
Q: Describe in detail the two false stories planted by Ausable to get rid of Max, the secret agent of the rival organization. Did the false stories have the desired effect? Give a reasoned answer.
A: Presence of mind, quick reactions and a fertile brain more than compensated the fat and sloppy man, Ausable. His fertile brain and the stories he cooked up proved more than a match for a gun-wielding rival Max. Ausable started in a simple but natural way the story of the balcony below the window of his room. He was able to convince Max that his balcony had really become a nuisance. It was the second time in the month that somebody had got into his room. Actually, it was a clever trap for Max to fall in and the desperate and nervous Max did fall into the trap. He jumped out of the window in desperation to avoid being arrested or shot at by the police. The second story related to the police was a masterstroke. It was the product of his fertile brain. Ausable knew that he could unnerve his gun-wielding rival by showing the threat of the police. He planted a false story that he himself sought the protection of the police. After all, the all-important report about the new missiles needed some extra protection. The loud knockings at the door signaled the arrival of the police. Max asked Ausable to send the police away. Ausable convinced Max that the police wouldn’t hesitate to shoot. In desperation, he jumped out, never to be able to come back again. Later on, Fowler found that the knockings at the door were done by the waiter. He entered with a tray, a bottle and two glasses.
Q: How did Max attempt but failed to acquire the secret paper from Ausable?
A: Max’s organisation had ordered him to grab the secret report on missiles which the people of Ausable’s organisation had managed to get. He used a passkey and entered Ausable’s hotel room at midnight. He was holding a revolver in his hand since he intended to grab the report at pistol point. Ausable invented the fake story of a balcony extending under his window just to embarrass Max.  He remarked that it was the second time in the month that somebody had got into his room through that’ balcony. Instantly there was a knock at the door. Ausable’s remark that police had arrived to check on him unnerved Max.- To save his life, Max rushed towards the window. In hot haste, Max dropped to the non-existent balcony and met his tragic end. Thus he failed to acquire the secret paper.

Chapter: the-necklace
Q: What kind of a person is her husband?
A: Her husband is a very simple and kind-hearted person. He is an ordinary man, who just like others, is caring and wants his wife to be happy.
Q: Why is Matilda unhappy with her life?
A: Matilda is unhappy with her life because she ceaselessly, felt herself born for all delicacies and luxuries. The shabby walls, the worn chairs in her house tortured and angered her.
Q: Why was Matilda sad after the ball?
A: Matilda was sad after the ball because she had lost the diamond necklace which she had borrowed from her friend Mme. Forester. She had to pay a very heavy price for it.
Q: What were the reasons for Matilda’s unhappiness?
A: Matilda was a pretty young lady but belonged to a poor family. She was married to a petty clerk. Her poverty and lack of recognition made her angry and unhappy.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: What did her husband bring home one evening? Why was he so elated?
A: One evening, her husband brought home an invitation card. They were invited to a party at the residence of the Minister of Public Instruction. He was so elated because he thought that it would make his wife happy.
Q: How did the Loisels react when they realised that the necklace had been lost?
A: Matilda Loisel became very sad when they realised that the necklace had been lost. They were sure that the loss of necklace would make their life hell because Mr Loisel was only a petty clerk and it was very difficult for him to replace necklace of diamond.
Q: How did Matilda get the jewels to wear to the ball?
A: Matilda went to her friend Madame Forestier’ s house. She told her the story of her distress. She borrowed a necklace of diamonds from her. In this way, slit: got jewels for the ball.
Q: Madame Lisle was intoxicated with pleasure at the ball. Give three reasons to support your Answer.
A: Madame Lisle was intoxicated with pleasure at the ball. She danced with enthusiasm. She received everyone’s admiration and flattery. She looked the prettiest of all: elegant, gracious, smiling and full of joy.
Q: Why she was not delighted on receiving the ‘invitation to the party?
A: Mrs. Loisel wanted to lead a life of luxury. She wanted to attend parties. One day her husband got an invitation to attend a party given by the Minister of Public Instruction. But she did not have a good dress to wear at the party. So she was not happy to get the invitation.
Q: What had Matilda’s husband saved the money for? Why did he then part with his savings?
A: Matilda’s husband had saved a good amount of money to buy a gun for him. But when his wife refused to attend the party without a new dress, he had to give up buying the gun. He used the saved four hundred francs to buy her costume.
Q: What was the cause of Matilda’s ruin? How could she have avoided it?
A: Matilda’s aspiration and unrealistic dreams were the cause of her ruin. She paid due importance to materialistic things. She could have easily avoided if she had remained within her means. She was not a practical lady and had not understood her husband’s feelings.
Q: Describe Matilda’s experience at the dance party.
A: Matilda looked very charming at the dance party. All the men at the party looked at her. They asked her name. Everybody wanted to be introduced to her. The officers at the party wanted to dance with her. She danced with joy. She had a great sense of victory.
Q: What changes occurred in Madame Lisle after 10 years?
A: Madame Lisle now knows the horrible life of necessity. She sent away from her maid and learned the odious work of a kitchen. She washed the dishes and the clothes on her own. She took down wastes to the street and brought up the water stopping at each landing to breathe. They changed their lodging and rented some rooms in the attic.She seemed old now and became strong and hard women. Her hair badly dressed her skirts awry, her hands red and spoke in a loud voice.
Q: What changes came into the life of Loisels after the necklace was lost?
A: They had to shift to a cheaper room and dismiss the servant. She did all the household works and shopping by herself. She fetched water, washed the floor, utensils and dirty clothes by herself. Matilda’s husband worked in the evening and late at night to pay back the debt.
Q: What was the greatest mistake of Mrs Loisel that became the cause of their miseries? Could she have averted it?
A: The greatest blunder that Matilda committed was that she didn’t take her friend into confidence. She should have told the whole story as it had happened. That would have pacified Madame klenn Forestier quite easily as the necklace she lent to her friend was not of real diamonds but false ones.
Q: Why was Madame Forestier shocked to hear Matilda’s story?
A: One Sunday, while walking, Matilda happened to see Madame Forestier. Matilda called her, but she could not recognise Matilda because she looked much older than her age. Madame Forestier was shocked to know that Matilda had suffered so much worrying about losing her necklace of real diamonds, whereas it was false.
Q: Why did Matilda think that she was born in a family of petty clerks by some error of destiny?
A: Matilda was a beautiful young lady with high dreams and aspirations. She had no dowry, no hopes, no fame and no wealth. She lost all hopes of marrying a man either rich or distinguished. She believed that she was born into a family of clerks only by some error of destiny. So, she allowed herself to marry a petty clerk in the office of the Board of Education.
Q: Why do you think that M. Lisle was a loving husband?
A: M. Lisle was a simple and poor clerk. He made every effort and sacrifice to make his wife happy. He sacrificed his 400 francs that he had saved to buy a gun for himself in order to buy a new party dress for his wife. It proves that he was a loving husband.
Q: Why didn’t Madame Forestier recognise Matilda? How did both the ladies look?
A: One day, Matilda was taking a walk in the Champs-Elysees. She suddenly saw a woman walking with a child. It was Madame Forestier. She was still young, pretty and still attractive. But Mrs Loisel looked just the difference. Her face was telling her story. She had so much changed that Madame Forestier couldn’t recognise her. She could only say, “Oh! my poor Matilda! How you have changed!”
Q: What fresh problem now disturbs Madame Loisel?
A: After buying a pretty dress, Madame Loisel was bothered by yet another problem. She had no jewels to adorn herself with. She said she would feel inferior and have a poverty-stricken look. Her husband -” suggested that she should wear some natural flowers. However, she refused and said that there was nothing more humiliating than to have a shabby air in the midst of rich women.
Q: Why didn’t Matilda like to visit her rich friend?
A: Matilda or Mrs Loisel always dreamt of things that were beyond her means. She dreamt of a grand house, costly dishes, good dresses and jewels. She was disillusioned that she couldn’t get them. When she visited her rich friend, she really suffered because she became intensely conscious of her poverty in the presence of her fortunate and rich friend. She suffered so much when she returned to her modest and miserable surroundings.
Q: How was Mr Lisle able to arrange 36,000 francs?
A: Losels possessed eighteen thousand francs, which his father had left for him. Rest of the money he borrowed from usurers and a whole race of lenders. He made ruinous promises for that. To repay this debt they had to change their lodgings. Madame Lisle had to do all the tedious jobs like washing, grocery shopping, and carrying water upstairs herself.
Q: What, was the cause of Matilda’s ruin? How could she have avoided it?
A: The cause of Matilda’s ruin was her dissatisfaction with whatever life offered her. She was always unhappy. She felt that she was born for all the delicacies and luxuries of life. She disliked being in her current circumstances. She could have avoided this ruin by bringing content with whatever she had.
Q: Why did Madame Lisle leave the ball in a hurry? What does it show about her character?
A: Madame Lisle left the ball in a hurry because her husband threw the modest wraps around her shoulders, whose poverty clashed with the elegance of the ball costume. She did not want to be noticed by the other woman who was wrapping themselves in rich furs. It shows the hypocrisy and showoff life of Madame Lisle. It shows her dissatisfaction, anger and frustration with life.
Q: How did Mr. and Mrs. Loisel replace the lost necklace and gave that to Madame Forestier?
A: When they had lost all hopes of getting the lost necklace, Mrs. and Mr. Loisel decided that they must replace the jewel. In a shop, they found a necklace which seemed to them exactly like the one they had lost. They could get it for 36000 francs. Mr. Loisel had 18000 francs which his father had left. They borrowed the rest of the money. The bought the new necklace and returned it to Madame Forestier.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: What do Mr. and Mrs. Loisel do next?
A: When Mr. and Mrs. Loisel realized that the necklace was missing, they tried finding out where she could have possibly lost it. They concluded that it might have been dropped in the cab they were travelling in. But they did not remember its number. So, in an attempt to find the necklace, Loisel went over the track where they had walked. When he found nothing, he went to the police and to the cab officers. He even put an advertisement in the newspapers, offering a reward. Meanwhile, he asked Matilda to write a letter to Mrs. Forestier, explaining that she had broken the clasp of the necklace and would get it repaired and return it soon. This gave them time to find the necklace. However, they eventually decided to replace the necklace with a new one.
Q: Draw a character sketch of Madame Forestier in your own words.
A: Madame Forestier plays quite an important role in the plot of the story ‘The Necklace’. She was a rich friend of Matilda. She was a schoolmate at the convent. Though quite rich, Madame Forestier never gave an image of an arrogant and snobbish lady. When Matilda told her that she needed jewels to adorn herself for the ball, she at once obliged her. She opened her jewel box and asked her to make her choice. She happily lent her a superb diamond necklace of her choice. If Matilda didn’t want to visit Madame Forestier, it was not her fault. Matilda’s inflated ego prevented her from going there. She suffered so much when she returned the necklace. Matilda suffered because she couldn’t enjoy all the delicacies and luxuries like her rich friend. Madame Forestier could snub Matilda for returning the necklace rather late. She told her, “You should have returned them to me sooner ” But she was a sympathetic lady. She showed her sympathy when she came to know of all miseries that Matilda suffered because of the necklace. Alas! Matilda didn’t take Madame Forestier into her confidence about the lost necklace. Madame Forestier was gracious enough to forgive her. After all, the jewels she lent to Matilda were false.
Q: On inability to accept our circumstances may lead to an unhappy life. Explain with reference to the story “The Necklace”.
A: We fail to recognise the situation in which we are placed but rather keep on grumbling. We become frustrated and want our life to be different. We should accept the life as it comes to us and should not keep on cribbing about unhappy circumstances. As we read the story The Necklace’ we find that Matilda is not at all happy with her husband. She had wished her life to be luxurious. It is this frustration of hers which puts her in a fix and spoils rest of her life. She does not work for solution but rather complicates the situation for her.
Q: “At the end of the ten years, they had restored all”. What had Matilda and her husband restored and at what cost?
A: Matilda lost the necklace borrowed from her wealthy friend Madame Forestier. They desperately tried to find out the necklace but in vain. Finally they decided to replace the necklace with a new one. M. Loisel spent his entire savings and even borrowed a loan to buy the necklace.  To repay the debt, they cut down their expenses. They sent away the maid and reported some rooms in an attic. They cut down their expenses. M. Loisel worked evenings, putting the books of some merchants in order, and nights he often did copying at five sous a page. This life lasted for ten years. At the end of ten years, they had restored all.
Q: “Oh! My poor Matilda! Mine was false.” Confession saves you from a lot of trouble and a sense of guilt. Justify the statement.
A: Matilda’s friend Mme Forester meets her after a long time, nearly a gap of ten years. Perhaps it was destined to. She does not recognize Matilda — old, hard and crude with disheveled hair and skirts awry. She is astonished to see Matilda in this pathetic condition. Matilda tells her the reason for this — the loss of the original necklace and the misery that followed after replacing the necklace. Mme Forester could only sympathies with Matilda, for the necklace she had lent to Matilda was not of original diamonds. She could have told this clearly to Matilda while giving it to her. Perhaps Mme forester thought she should not dampen Matilda’s spirits by revealing the truth. But what the loss of it. Brought to Matilda was irreversible. Matilda on her part should have revealed the loss of the necklace to her friend. If it had been of real diamonds, then she could have asked for some time to replace it. Matilda could have thus taken her friend into confidence, but the silent suffering had really taken its toll on her life. If Matilda had only taken courage and been honest to her friend, she would still have been living comfortably, thus justifying the statement given above. Her own senseless attitude led to her ruin.
Q: How did Matilda manage a new dress and jewelry for the ball?
A: Mrs. Loisel did not have a good dress to wear at the party. She told her husband that a suitable dress would cost four hundred francs. Her husband had been saving money in order to buy a gun. He gave up the idea of purchasing the gun. Mrs. Loisel purchased a beautiful dress with that money. But Mrs. Loisel was still not happy. Now she told her husband that she did not have any jewelry to wear at the party. Her husband asked her to request Mrs. Forestier for help. Mrs. Loisel and Mrs. Forestier were very good friends. Mrs. Forestier was very rich. She had a number of necklaces. Her husband suggested that she should borrow a necklace from her. Mrs. Loisel liked the idea. She went to her friend. Mrs. Forestier agreed to lend her a necklace. She showed her several of her necklaces. She asked Mrs. Loisel to choose any of those necklaces. All these necklaces looked attractive and costly. At last Mrs. Loisel selected a beautiful necklace and borrowed it. In this way, Mrs. Loisel made preparations for the party.
Q: What would have happened to Matilda if she had confessed to her friend that she had lost her necklace?
A: If Matilda would have confessed to her friend she had lost her necklace, she might have been in lesser trouble than what she had to face after having replaced the necklace. Her friend would have definitely been angry with her. Most likely, she would also have asked Matilda to replace it and given her the details from where she had bought the necklace and how much it had cost her. Matilda would have thus known that the jewels in the necklace were actually not real diamonds. It would have cost her a far lesser amount to replace it. Matilda would thus have saved herself and her husband of all the trouble they went through and life would have been much better and easier for them.
Q: 'The Necklace' reveals that vanity is evil. It may bring joy for a short period but ultimately it leads to ruin. If you were placed in a situation similar to that of Matilda, what would you have done? Write your views.
A: It is true that vanity is evil. It may bring joy for a short period but ultimately it leads to ruin. Matilda, to get a little pleasure and to show her vanity, borrowed a diamond necklace to wear at the minister’s party. She lost it. Mr. Lisle her husband took a big loan to replace it. For ten years both of them worked hard to repay the loan. Poor Matilda had to sacrifice her comfort, youth, softness and beauty. She became a crude, hard, poor lady with rough hair and hands. Later, the irony was Mrs. Forester told her that it was a false diamond necklace only for 500 francs. If I were placed in such a situation, I would have told my friend the truth. I would have told her that I felt extremely sorry for losing it and would have assured her that I would replace it, only she should tell me where to get it from and how much it would cost.

Chapter: the-thiefs-story
Q: Why did Anil agree to feed Hari Singh?
A: Anil needed a helping hand who could cook for him. When Hari Singh said that he could copk well, Anil agreed to feed him.
Q: Who does ‘I’ refer to in this story?
A: In this story, I refers to the thief.
Q: Why did Hari Singh not make many friends?
A: Hari Singh did not have friends as he believed that friends were more trouble than help. Moreover, he did not want to make anyone curious.
Q: What is he “a fairly successful hand” at?
A: He is “a fairly successful hand” at stealing and robbing people.
Q: Why did Hari Singh not go to his friend’s house or a hotel just after he missed the train?
A: Hari Singh did not have any friends and he did not want to make anyone curious about staying at one of the small hotels near the station.
Q: How does the thief think Anil will react to the theft?
A: The thief thinks that on discovering the theft, Anil’s face would show a touch of sadness. The sadness would not be for the loss of money, but for the loss of trust.
Q: Why was the thief able to steal from Anil easily?
A: Anil was a person who trusted Hari Singh easily. Also, he seemed to be a slightly careless person. Thus, his gullibility and trusting nature made it easy for Hari to rob him.
Q: When and how did Hari Singh meet Anil?
A: Hari Singh met Anil when he was watching a wrestling match. Hari Singh tried to befriend Anil.
Q: What did Anil give him in the morning? In what condition was it?
A: Anil gave him a fifty-rupee note in the morning. It was still wet from the night’s rain.
Q: How did the thief realised that Anil knew that it had been stolen?
A: Anil gave a fifty rupee note to the thief. It was still wet from the night’s rain. So, the thief realised and knew that it had been stolen.
Q: How did Hari Singh succeed in his profession?
A: He would frequently change his name to dupe the police. He would find out a kind and simple person for his target. He could wait until he had a favourable chance.
Q: Why according to Hari, is it difficult to rob a careless man?
A: Hari thinks that it is difficult to rob a careless man. Sometimes he does not even notice that he has been robbed. This takes out the joy of robbing him.
Q: Why should he find friends to be more trouble than help?
A: Hari Singh was a very poor boy. Those whom he knew were also poor like him. So, he thought that friends would be troublesome.
Q: How was Hari Singh’s ‘appealing smile’ at the end different from similar smiles of his on earlier occasions?
A: On earlier occasions, Hari Singh’s ‘appealing smile’ had been artificial. It was full of flattery. But in the end, his smile was real. It was natural and appealing.
Q: Why was the thief grateful to Anil?
A: The thief was grateful to Anil because he gave him a job. Secondly, he promised to teach him to read and write.
Q: Why did he want to become an educated man?
A: He was an uneducated person. He made his living by stealing and cheating others. He thought if he were educated there would be no limit to what he would achieve.  Short Answer Type Questions
Q: What was the thief s reaction when he took Anil’s money?
A: As the thief got the money he quickly crawled out of the room. When he was on the road, he began to run. He had the notes at his waist, held them by the string of his pyjamas. Later on he slowed down to walk and counted the notes. He thought that with those 600 rupees he could lead a luxurious life like an oil-rich Arab at least for a week.
Q: Why did Hari Singh decide to come back to Anil?
A: Hari Singh decided to come back to Anil because he felt that when Anil would come to know about the theft, he would feel sad, not for the loss of money but for the loss of trust. He did not want to lose his trust.
Q: What does he get from Anil in return for his work?
A: When Hari asks Anil if he could work for him, Anil replies that he could not pay him. Finally, they reach an agreement that if he would cook, then Anil would feed him. However, Anil soon found out that he did not know how to cook. So, he taught him how to cook and later, how to write his name. He promised he would teach him how to write whole sentences and also how to add numbers. Apart from this, when Hari went out to buy the day’s supplies, he would make a profit of a rupee a day.
Q: Why did Hari Singh choose Anil to be his next victim?
A: Hari Singh was an experienced thief. He found Anil, a wrestler an easy-going, kind and simple man, the correct person for his purpose. He found him an easy target to win confidence.
Q: Why was it difficult for Hari Singh to rob Anil?
A: It was difficult to rob Anil because he was the most trusting person Hari Singh has ever met. According to Hari Singh, it’s easy to rob a greedy man because he can afford to be robbed but it’s difficult to rob a careless man because he doesn’t even notice that he’s been robbed and that takes all the pleasure out of the work.
Q: Why did Hari Singh tell lies about cooking?
A: Hari Singh said that he could cook but when he cooked the meal at night, it was so terrible that Anil gave it to a stray dog and told him to be off. But then Anil patted him and said that he would teach him to cook.
Q: Why did Hari Singh feel bad after stealing the money?
A: Anil had trusted Hari Singh completely and also taught him how to cook. Anil also) started teaching him how to read and write. Thus, when Hari stole money from Anil, conscience pricked him as he had broken Anil’s trust.
Q: What are the different reactions of the people when they are robbed?
A: 0 According to Hari Singh, different people react differently upon being robbed. The greedy man displays fear, the rich man shows anger, and the poor man shows acceptance. However, a trusting man like Anil would be sad due to the loss of trust.
Q: Why did Anil hire Hari Singh?
A: Anil hired Hari Singh because Hari Singh himself expressed his desire to work for him. When Anil told him that he could not pay him, Hari Singh asked him if he could feed him. Anil replied that if he knew how to cook, then he may work for him.
Q: How did Hari Singh realize that Anil knew about his theft?
A: Anil gave him a fifty rupees note in the morning, which was still damp from the night’s rain. Anil told him that he would start teaching him how to write full sentences and smiled at him. This made Hari Singh realize that Anil knew everything.
Q: How did he think Anil would react when he discovered the theft? Why did he think so?
A: Hari Singh thought that when Anil would come to know of the theft, his face would show a touch of sadness. It would not be for the loss of money but for the loss of trust.
Q: What made him come back to Anil?
A: Anil had been teaching Hari Singh to read and write. He thought that without education, he would remain only a thief. But with education, he would become a big, clever and respected man. This made him come back to Anil.
Q: Why did the thief smile without any effort towards the end of the story
A: The thief was under tension that his master would be angry with him for stealing the money. But Anil did not express any anger. He said that he would pay him regularly and would remain to continue teaching him full sentences. This made him tension free and he smiled without any effort.
Q: Why did Hari Singh feel nervous about going back to Anil’s room?
A: Hari Singh decided to go back to Anil and replace the stolen money under the mattress. But he felt nervous about going there. He thought that it was much easier to steal something than to return it undetected.
Q: How and when did Hari Singh meet Anil?
A: Hari Singh met Anil during a wrestling match. He found Anil easy going, kind and simple enough to suit his purpose. Anil’s trusting nature could help him with stealing. Therefore, he offered himself to work for Anil. Anil had no regular income and couldn’t afford to pay him. But still Hari Singh exploited Anil’s generosity and he forced Anil to keep him in his house.
Q: Anil couldn’t afford to pay Hari Singh. Why did he allow Hari Singh to stay with him?
A: Hari Singh offered himself to work for Anil. Anil didn’t have a regular income and couldn’t afford to pay him regularly. Hari Singh wanted to exploit such a kind-hearted and simple man like Anil. He lied that he knew how to cook. Anil was forced to allow Hari Singh to stay with him in his house.
Q: How did Hari Singh feel working for Anil? Did Anil know that Hari Singh was making a little money from purchases?
A: Hari Singh felt quite pleasant working for Anil. He would make tea for him in the morning. He would take his time for the day’s supplies. Usually, Hari would make a profit of about a rupee a day. Anil; mew about the stealing. But he allowed Hari to do so because he couldn’t afford to pay him regularly. He didn’t mind it.
Q: How did Hari Singh steal the money that Anil got from selling his book to a publisher?
A: Hari Singh saw with his own eyes how Anil tucked the bundle of money under the mattress of his bed. When Anil was asleep, Hari Singh crept up to the bed. He slid his hand under the mattress and drew the money out of the bundle without making a sound. Anil sighed in his sleep and turned on his side, towards him. Han Singh got startled and quickly came out of the room.
Q: How did Hari Singh forget about his education in the excitement of his theft? What did he think about it in the end?
A: Anil taught Hari Singh to write his name. He also promised to teach him making complete sentences and adding numbers. In his excitement of the theft, he forgot all about his education. But good sense prevailed and in the end, he realised that education could give him respect and much more money.
Q: Why didn’t Anil hand Hari Singh over to the police even when he knew all about the theft?
A: Anil was careless and unsuspecting but not a fool. He knew how the boy stole money out of daily shopping. He also knew all about the theft of his 600 rupees. He could have easily handed him over to the police. However, he didn’t want to ruin Hari Singh’s life. He wanted to give an education to the unfortunate boy. So, he gave a fifty rupee note and promised to pay him regularly. Neither his lips nor his eyes showed anything about the theft.  Long Answer Type Questions
Q: “A thief in Hari Singh changed into a good human being”. How far was Anil’s considerate nature responsible for this transformation?
A: Hari Singh was an experienced thief who had robbed many people at such a tender age of fifteen years.’ He joined Anil as a cook with a motive of stealing money. But Anil was a kind and considerate person. He employed Hari Singh and taught him how to cook. He trusted him like his younger brother. He was always sympathetic towards him. Hari Singh found it was very difficult to rob such a good human being. He stole money but his conscience did not allow him to run away. He came back and became a good human being. There was a change in his heart. Thus, it was Anil’s considerate nature which was responsible for this transformation.
Q: What kind of a life was Hari Singh leading with Anil?
A: Anil engaged Hari Singh as a house-servant. His duty was to cook food and prepare tea for Anil. He was not an expert in cooking. But Anil taught him how to cook food. He went to the market to buy vegetables and other things of daily necessity. For the thief, it was quite pleasant working for Anil. Anil had told him that he would teach him reading and writing. The thief was grateful to Anil for giving him a job and for his promise to make him an educated man. He knew that once he could write like an educated man then there would be no limit to what he could achieve.
Q: Give a character-sketch of Anil. Did he know all about the theft? If so, why did he keep Hari Singh again to work for him?
A: Anil is a thorough gentleman. He is generous, large-hearted and understanding. He is twenty-five years old and unmarried. He doesn’t have a regular income. He writes for magazines. When he receives a cheque, he goes out and celebrates. Anil is a simple man who is ever-ready to help even a worthless boy like Hari Singh. He knows that Hari Singh lied that he knew how to cook. Still, he allows him to work for him. Anil is a progressive young man. Being a writer himself, he knows the value of education. He teaches Hari Singh to write his name. He promises to teach him to write whole sentences and to add numbers. Anil knew all about the theft. He knew how and when Hari Singh stole the money and put it back under the mattress. Neither his lips nor his eyes showed anything about it. He didn’t want to hand Hari Singh over to the police. It would have mined him. The thief had no option but to return to such a generous and large-hearted person. The reformer, Anil rewarded the boy-thief by giving him a fifty-rupee note. He also promised to pay him regularly.
Q: ‘He was the most trusting person I had ever met.’ Justify this statement of Hari Singh about his benefactor, Anil. Did he breach Anil’s trust?
A: After his first introduction, Hari Singh understood Anil’s nature and his character rather well? He lied that he knew how to cook. Still, Anil allowed Hari to work for him. Even at the age of 15, Hari Singh was an experienced and successful hand. He knew all the tricks of his trade. He made one rupee every day from buying the day’s supplies. Anil knew it but didn’t mind. Anil was really a trusting person. He had given Hari a key to the door and he could come and go as he pleased. But it was `so difficult to rob him’. It is easy to rob a greedy man. It was difficult to rob a careless and trusting man like Anil. Sometimes, he didn’t even notice that he had been robbed. That took all the pleasure out of Hari Singh’s work.Anil was no fool. He knew all about the theft, when and how it was committed. Neither his lips nor eyes showed that he saw Hari placing the money back under the mattress. Trust begets trust. Ultimately, the boy-thief realised that the only person who could help him was the man whom he had robbed a few hours ago. Naturally, Anil was the most trusting man Hari Singh had ever met in his life. And forgot the Tut Chase’s grow breach of his trust but rewarded Hari by giving a fifty-rupee-note and promising to pay him regularly.
Q: Hari Singh could have lived like a rich Arab for a week or two. Why did he choose to go back to Anil in the end?
A: Hari Singh definitely had a bumper catch. The money he stole from under Anil’s bedroom’s mattress was perhaps the largest amount he had ever stolen in life. When he was on the road, he counted the money. It was a sum of rupees six hundred, in the fifties. With that money, Hari Singh could live in luxury like a rich Arab, at least for a week or two. He decided to run away with the money and came to the station. He found that the Lucknow Express had just moved. He could have jumped into one of the compartments but couldn’t do so. Perhaps something troubled him. He hesitated and remained standing alone on a deserted platform. He had no friends. The only man he knew was Anil whom he had robbed only a few hours ago. The thing that motivated Hari Singh to go back to Anil was his love for getting an education. He realised that education could give him respect, status and much more money than he could get from stealing. Anil had promised him to teach writing and adding numbers. Han Singh’s urge to get an education brought him back to Anil.
Q: Anil plays a major role in the transformation of Hari Singh. Comment on the statement by highlighting the values possessed by Anil which touched Hari’s heart and made him return to his honest ways of earning his livelihood. Write in about 100-120 words.
A: Anil was a struggling writer who befriended Hari Singh. Hari Singh was an experienced, 15-year-old thief. He found Anil an easy target to steal. Anil offered him to stay with him and to teach how to read and write. Gradually, Anil develops trust in Hari Singh. But Hari Singh was waiting for the right opportunity to do what he was best at. After stealing money, he tried to go away forever but some inner voice stopped him from doing so. He returned to Anil because he wanted to live a life of respect. Anil did not show that he knew the incident and accepted Hari with open hands. Thus, a well-intentioned person, Anil changed Hari Singh and brought him on the right path. The story shows that trust and spirit to forgive someone can bring big changes in someone’s life.
Q: The chapter shows Hari Singh’s journey from a thief to an honest man who value friendship and other human values. Do you think it was Anil’s selfless friendship that he Hari to redeem himself? Give reasons in support of your answer in 100-120 words.
A: The chapter reveals Hari Singh’s transformation from a thief into an honest It was Anil’s selfless friendship that helped Hari to redeem himself. Gradually the Hari Singh began to understand human values such as friendship and trust. When robbed Anil, he felt guilty of having violated the trust that Anil had reposed in him. He could not board the train and missed his chance to getaway. Moreover, he and kand even valued Anil’s friendship feelings toward him as he knew that after discovering the theft, Anil would not be sad for the loss of money, but for loss of trust.
Q: ‘The Thief’s Story’ is an in-depth study of the human mind. Discuss.
A: The human mind is a very complex thing. It is a mixture of opposite opinions. Sometimes a man fails to understand his own mind. In this story, the same thing has been presented by Ruskin Bond through the character of a thief boy Hari Singh. The boy starts working for Anil. His primary aim was to rob him. Anil’s carelessness wins his heart. But the boy’s bad mind provokes him to rob Anil of his money. One day he robs his six hundred rupees and runs away to the station. But his good mind stops him boarding the train. He decides to come back to Anil and return his money. So this story is an in-depth study of the human mind.
Q: How did Hari Singh steal the money? Describe the circumstances that brought him back to work for Hari Singh. What was the main motivating factor that forced him to take that decision?
A: Anil had sold a book to a publisher. He got a good sum of money in return. Hari Singh saw him tuck the money under the mattress of his bed. The boy-thief was an experienced hand. He breached Anil’s trust and stole the money. He counted and found a sum of 600 in the fifties. He realised that with that money he could live like a rich Arab at least for a week or two. Hari Singh tried to run away with the money but failed. He was actually struggling with himself. He deliberately missed the Lucknow Express. He sat thinking about himself on a bench on a chilly night. He came to a conclusion. He had no friends. The only person who could help him was Anil and he had robbed him a few hours earlier. Then came the realisation what Anil was doing for him. He promised to give him an education. Hari Singh realised that education could bring respect and money to him? In the heat and excitement of the theft, he had forgotten about the education. Getting an education was the main motivating force that brought the boy-thief Hari Singh back to Anil.
Q: Hari Singh didn’t confess that he robbed Anil. Did he lack the courage to do so or he really wanted to maintain his relationship with Anil at any cost? Explain the values Hari needed to imbibe in about 100-120 words.
A: Hari Singh was a teenager, of 15. He was good at stealing. He chose Anil to be his next target as he was a struggling author and a simple person. Hari Singh started living with Anil who in turn, started teaching him how to read and write? Hari Singh, one day got the opportunity to steal Anil’s money. He left out with the money to go away forever but his inner “ice stopped him. He returned back and kept the money in place. Next morning he started with his routine work and didn’t tell anything about the incident to Anil. He was a teenager and lacked the courage to face Anil with his truth. He did not want to lose Anil’s trust. He wanted to maintain the relationship with Anil, wanted to get an education and become a respected man. So, he hid the incident from Anil.
Q: Write a character sketch of the thief boy.
A: The thief was a fifteen years old boy. But in this story, he has been presented as a well experienced and skillful thief. He had a great knowledge of human behavior. He knew that simple-looking persons could be robbed easily. He had an understanding that a little flattery could help in making friends. He was clever enough to change his name to keep himself away from the police and his former employers. He was perfect in telling lies. He had a desire to become a big man in life. He robbed Anil of his six hundred rupees. But in one corner of his heart, there was a sense of trust and goodness. He thought that he should not betray Anil. He had the ambition of becoming a big man and he knew that he could realise his ambition only when he is educated. Thus, he was an interesting character.
Q: Why did Hari Singh decide to return the stolen money? What light does it throw on his character?
A: After stealing the money when Hari Singh reached the station, he could not board the Lucknow Express though he could easily get on it. He stood alone on the deserted platform and thought about Anil who he knew would feel only sadness for the loss of trust when he discovered the theft. He felt that he should go back to Anil if only to read and write. So he decided to return to Anil feeling very nervous. The thief was very grateful to Anil and quite liked working for him. Since Anil was the most trusting man he had met. Anil’s confidence had awakened his conscience. He wanted to become a good man. Anil could only make him a good man. So he decided to come back to Anil and return the money that he had stolen.
Q: Describe the sequence of events that took place after Hari Singh stole the money. Evaluate Hari Singh as a thief and as a human being.
A: Hari Singh was a seasoned thief even at the age of fifteen. He knew all the tricks of his trade. As a thief, he knew how to hoodwink his master and make one rupee every day out of buying of the day’s supplies. And he, a seasoned thief, stole 600 rupees from under the mattress. With that money, he could live like a rich Arab for a week or two. He came to the station but deliberately missed the Lucknow Express. He was struggling with himself. He came to the ‘maiden’ and was drenched in the rain on a chilly November night. He had no friends and did not like to go to a hotel either. He was in a dilemma. Then good sense prevailed and he decided to go back to the man whom he had robbed a few hours earlier. His love for education was the motivating force that led him to this decision. So, as a thief, he was quite an experienced and fairly a successful hand. But love, generosity and human compassion of Anil helped in transforming him into a better human being. He realised the value of education. Only education could give him respect, status and money.
Q: “Everyone must have a chance to reform”. How did Anil worked upon these values and succeeded?
A: Hari Singh had all the sharp wickedness to rob a person. He knew how to rob and whom to rob. He chose Anil for his purpose because the later was simple and easy, to approach. But when Anil started teaching him how to write words and then sentences and adding numbers, a good man in Hari Singh started dreaming of a life full of honestly and dignity. He got the chance to rob, he robed but the dream of being educated did not let him go. He returned to be educated.

